# The Giver of the Invitation

**FIRST DAY - *THE GIVER OF THE INVITATION.***

"Come Unto Me."

This is the Royal Invitation. For it is given by the King of kings. We
are so familiar with the words, that we fail to realize them. May the
Holy Spirit open our ear that we may hear the voice (Jhn 10:27) of our
King in them, and that they may reach our souls with imperative power.
Then,'they shall know in that day that I am He that doth speak.'

'Lord, to whom shall we go?' Not 'to *what* shall we go.' For the human
heart (Jhn 6:58) within us craves a personal, living rest and refuge. No
doctrines, however true; no systems, however perfect; nothing mental,
moral, or spiritual, will do as the answer to this question of every
soul that is not absolutely dead in trespasses and sins. (Eph 2:1) As
surely as you and I are persons, individualities, real separate
existences, so surely must we have a Person, no less real and
individual, to whom to go in our more or less conscious need of
salvation. And so the great word of Invitation, Royal and Divine, is
given to us, 'Come unto ME!'

'Unto *Me*.' Just think what that one word means! Seek out all the great
and wonderful titles of Christ (Isa 9:6) for yourself, and write after
each one-'And *He* says, Come unto *Me!*' Unto Me, 'the mighty God,'
nothing less than that! 'Mighty to save' and 'ready to save me.'

Then seek out all the exquisitely winning beauties of the character and
words and ways of Him who went about doing good, (Act 10:38) till you
'have heard Him and observed Him.' All through those years of patient
and perfect ministry, and recollect all the time that it is *He* who
says to you, 'Come unto *Me!*' Unto Him, the man Christ Jesus, (1Ti 2:5)
full of compassion, and tender yet royal grace.

Then look at the great central scene of the universe,-the central moment
not of a world's history only, but of eternity;-look at the Saviour, who
His own self bare our sins (1Pe 2:24) in His own body on the tree,
bowing His bleeding head under that awful burden, because His
faithfulness was unto the death, and His love was strong as death!
'Behold your God,' and 'Behold the Man,' (Jhn 19:5) who loved you and
gave Himself for you; hear His own touching call, 'I said, Behold Me,
behold Me!' Look away from all the 'other things,' (Mar 4:19) look at
the Crucified One, and, as you gaze, remember that *He* says, 'Come unto
Me!'

Is it nothing to you, (Lam 1:12) all ye that pass by, that both from the
depth of sorrow, and from the height of glory this Royal Invitation
comes to you?

For it is the call not only of Jesus Crucified, but of Jesus Reigning
and Jesus Coming. 'See that ye refuse (Hbr 12:25) not Him that
speaketh,' for He is coming (Rev 1:7) to judge the quick and the dead.
He is reigning now, and there are no neutrals in His kingdom. All are
either willing and loyal subjects, or actual rebels,-those who have
obeyed the King's call, and come, and those who have 'made light (Mat
22:5) of it,' and *not* come.

Which are you?

Think of the day when the great white throne is set, and when the Son of
man shall come in His glory; when all will be gathered before Him, and
He shall separate (Mat 25:32) them one from another, and know that it is
'this same Jesus' who now says to you, 'Come unto *Me!* '

> Just as I am-without one plea,\
>  But that Thy blood was shed for me,\
>  And that Thou bidd'st me come to Thee,\
>  O Lamb of God, I come!\

# What Is 'Coming'?

**SECOND DAY - *WHAT IS 'COMING'?***

"Come unto Me." (Mat 11:28)

But what is 'coming'?

One's very familiarity with the terms used to express spiritual things,
seems to have a tendency to make one feel mystified about them. And
their very simplicity makes one suspicious, as it were, that there must
be some mysterious and mystical meaning behind them, because they sound
*too* easy and plain to have such great import. 'Come' means
'come,'-just that! and not some occult process of mental effort.

What would you understand by it, if you heard it today for the first
time, never having had any doubts or suppositions or previous notions
whatever about it? What does a little child (Mat 11:25) understand by
it? It is positively too simple to be made plainer by any amount of
explanation. If you could see the Lord Jesus standing there, right
before you, and you heard Him say, 'Come!' (Mat 14:29) would you say,
'What does "come" mean?' And if the room were dark, so that you could
only hear and not see, would it make any difference? Would you not turn
instantly towards the 'Glorious Voice'? (Isa 30:30) Would you not, in
heart and will, and intention, instantaneously obey it?-that is, if you
*believed* it to be Himself. For, 'he that cometh (Jhn 6:35) to God must
believe that He is.' The coming so hinges on that, as to be really the
same thing. The moment you really believed, you would really come; and
the moment you really come, you really believe. Now the Lord Jesus is as
truly and actually 'nigh thee' (Deu 30:14) as if you could see Him. And
He as truly and actually says 'Come' to you as if you heard Him. Fear
not, believe only, and *let* yourself come to Him straight away! 'Take
with you words and turn to the Lord: say unto Him, Take away all
iniquity, and receive us graciously.' And know that His answer is, 'Him
that cometh (Jhn 6:37) to Me I will in no wise cast out.'

Do you still feel unaccountably puzzled about it? Give a quiet hour to
the records of how others came to Him. Begin with the eighth of St.
Matthew, and trace out all through the Gospels how they came to Jesus
with all sorts of different needs, (Mat 9:10, 14, 18, 20, 28) and trace
in these your own spiritual needs of cleansing, healing, salvation,
guidance, sight, teaching. They knew what they wanted, and they knew
Whom they wanted. And consequently they just *came*. (Jhn 3:26) Ask the
Holy Spirit to show you what you want and Whom you want, and you will
talk no more about what it means, you will just *come*. (Jhn 12:32) And
then you will say, 'Now we believe, not because of thy saying; for we
have heard Him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the
Saviour of the world;' and you will say, '*My* Lord and *my* God." (Jhn
20:28)
# All Things Are Ready

**THIRD DAY - *ALL THINGS ARE READY.***

"Come; for all things are now ready."

*All* things! God the Father is ready to save you. Jesus Christ is ready
to receive you. The Holy Spirit (Rom 8:9) is ready to dwell in you. Are
you ready?

*All* things. The 'great salvation' is ready for you. The full atonement
is made for you. The eternal redemption is obtained for you. Are you
ready?

*All* things. The cleansing fountain (Rom 3:22) is opened for you. The
robe of righteousness is wrought for you. The way (Hbr 10:19-20) into
the holiest is consecrated for you. Are you ready?

*All* things. All things that pertain unto life and godliness are given
you by His Divine power. (2Pe 1:3-4) Exceeding great and precious
promises are given you. The supply of all your need is guaranteed to
you. Strength and guidance, teaching and keeping, are provided for you.
Even the good works in which you shall walk are prepared (Act 22:10) for
you. A Father's love and care and a Saviour's gift of peace are waiting
for you. The feast is spread for you. All these things are ready (Mat
22:4) for you. Are you ready for them?

Even if you did not heed nor believe any other words of Jesus, could
you-*can* you-doubt His dying words? Surely they are worthy of all
acceptation! (1Ti 1:15) What are they?

"IT IS FINISHED!"

*What* is finished? 'I have finished the work that Thou gavest Me to
do.' And what is that work? Simply the work of our salvation. (1Jo 4:14)
That is the reason why all things are now ready, because Jesus has
finished that all-inclusive work. When a thing is finished, how much is
there left to do? The question sounds too absurd with respect to
ordinary things. We hardly take the trouble to answer, 'Why, nothing, of
course!' When Jesus has finished the work how much is there left for you
to do? Do you not see? *Nothing*, of course! You have only to accept
(Act 16:30-31) that work as really finished, and accept His dying
declaration that it is so. What further assurance would you have? Is not
this enough? Does your heart say Yes, or No?

'Do ye now believe?' (Jhn 16:31) Settle that; and then what follows?
Hear another word of the Faithful Witness. Remember, it is no less true
than the other. The holy Lips that spoke that grand truth on the cross
spoke nothing that could deceive or mislead. 'Verily, verily, I say unto
you, He that believeth on Me hath everlasting life.' What does this
mean? Just what it says, and nothing less! It means that even if you
never believed before-even if you never had a spark of faith or glimmer
of hope before-yet if you have now given your heart-assent to Jesus and
His finished work, you have now everlasting life! (Jhn 3:16) That
heart-assent is believing; and 'he that believeth on the Son hath
everlasting life.' And this 'believing' (Jhn 6:35) is 'coming;' and thus
coming you shall find for yourself that all things are indeed ready.

What now? Shall praise be the only thing not ready? Will you not now
prove your acceptance of the great gift (2Co 9:15) of eternal life by
pouring out your thanks at once for it, and prove your trust in the
finished work by praising (Psa 9:1) the Saviour who died to finish it
for you? (Rev 5:9-12)

> From the cross uplifted high,\
>  Where the Saviour deigns to die,\
>  What melodious sounds I hear,\
>  Bursting on my ravished ear!\
>  Love's redeeming work is done;\
>  Come, and welcome! sinner, come!\
>
> Spread for thee the festal board,\
>  See with richest dainties stored;\
>  To thy Father's bosom pressed,\
>  Yet again a child confessed,\
>  Never from His house to roam;\
>  Come, and welcome! sinner, come!
>
> *Thomas Haweis*
# Now

**FOURTH DAY - *NOW.***

"Come now."

All things are *now* ready, (Luk 14:17) therefore come *now!*

Experience does not run on rails laid regularly down, and readers do not
always go hand in hand and heart to heart with the writer. I only wish
they did! Then we might try to lead on more quickly, instead of
reiterating (Isa 28:10) the one call, in the hope that it may, first or
last, be heard and obeyed! Please do not imagine, because there are
twenty-seven more chapters on the same subject, that there is any sort
of slow necessary progress, any set of ideas and feelings to be gone or
got through, gradually working up to the climax of 'coming.' This is all
cut short by the simple word, 'Come *now!*' Nothing can be plainer. (2Co
6:2) Therefore, if you postpone coming, you are calmly disobeying God.
When we bid a child to 'come,' we do not count it obedience unless it
comes at once, then and there. It is not obedience if it stops to
consider, and coolly tells you it is 'really thinking about coming,'
(Rom 10:21) and waits to see how long you will choose to go on calling
it.

What right have we to treat (Jer 7:13) our holy Lord as we would not
think of letting a naughty child treat us? He says, 'Come now.' And
'now' does not mean tomorrow. 'Today, if ye will hear His voice, harden
not your hearts.' (Hbr 4:7)

Put it to yourself, what if *this night* God should require (Luk 12:20)
your soul of you, and you had not 'come'? What if the summons find you
still far off, when the Precious Blood (Eph 2:13) was ready, by which
you might have been made nigh? You do not know what a day may bring
forth. There are plenty of things besides immediate death which may just
as effectually prevent (Hbr 12:17) your ever coming at all if you do not
come now. This might be your last free hour for coming. Tomorrow the
call may seem rather less urgent, and the 'other things entering (Mar
4:19) in' may deaden it, and the grieved spirit may withdraw and cease
to give you even your present inclination to listen to it, and so you
may drift on and on, farther and farther from the haven of safety (into
which you may enter *now* if you will), till it is out of sight on the
horizon. And then it may be too late to turn the helm, and the current
may be too strong; and when the storm of mortal illness at last comes,
you may find that you are too weak mentally or physically to rouse
yourself even to hear, much less to come. What *can* one do when fever
or exhaustion are triumphing over mind and body? Do not risk it. Come
NOW! And 'though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as
snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.' (Isa
1:18)
# Coming into the Ark

**FIFTH DAY - *COMING INTO THE ARK.***

"Come thou, and all thy house, into the Ark." (Gen 7:1)

No need to repeat the story! We knew it all at six years old. Today the
words, are sent to you, 'Come *thou!*'

We are either inside or outside the Ark. There is no halfway (Deu
30:15-19) in this. Outside is death, inside is life. Outside is certain,
inevitable, utter destruction. Inside is certain and complete safety.
Where are you at this moment? Perhaps you dare not say confidently and
happily, 'I am inside;' and yet you do not like to look the alarming
alternative in the face, and say, 'I am outside!' And you prefer trying
to persuade (1Jo 2:5) yourself that you do not exactly know, and can't
be expected to be able to answer such a question. And you say, perhaps
with a shade of annoyance, 'How *am* I to know?' (1Jo 4:13) God's
infallible Word tells you very plainly,'If any man be *in* Christ, he is
a new creature: (2Co 5:17) old things are passed away; behold, all
things are become new.'A very severe test!' you say. I cannot help that;
I can only tell you exactly what God says. 'I cannot reverse it,' (Num
23:20) and you cannot alter it. So then, if old things have *not* passed
away in your life, and if you are *not* a new creature,'born again,'
altogether different in heart and life and love and aim, you are not 'in
Christ.' And if you are not '*in* Christ,' you are *out* of Christ,
outside the only place of safety. (Act 4:12)

'Come thou *into* the ark!' It is one of the devices of the destroyer to
delude you into fancying that no very decided step is necessary. He is
very fond of the word 'gradually.' You are to become more
earnest-gradually. You are to find salvation-gradually. You are to turn
your mind to God-gradually. Did you ever think that God never once uses
this word nor anything like it? Neither the word nor the sense of it
occurs in any way in the whole Bible with reference to salvation. (Act
16:33) You might have been 'gradually' approaching the Ark, and
'gradually' making up your mind to enter; but unless you took the one
step *into* the Ark, the one step from outside to inside, what would
have been your fate when the door was shut? (Gen 7:21-22) 'Come *thou*
into the Ark!' I want the call to haunt you, to ring in your ears all
day and all night, *till you come*.

For at this moment, if you are not *in* the Ark, you are in more awful
danger than you can conceive. Just because you know it is so awful, (Psa
50:22) you shut your eyes and try *not* to think of it! But there it is,
all the same. Any moment the door may be shut for you. Any hour may be
the sunset of your day of grace, (Hbr 12:17) with no twilight of
possibilities of salvation beyond. And then, as the tree falleth, so it
lieth. As death finds you, so the judgment will find you. Where it finds
you, inside or outside the Ark, there the day of the Lord will find you,
'in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
elements shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and the works
that are therein, shall be burned up.' (2Pe 3:10) What will you do then,
when neither heavens nor earth afford even a standing-place for you?
(Rev 6:17)

But 'come thou *into the Ark!*' Jesus is the Ark. He is the Hiding-place
from that fiery tempest. 'I flee unto thee to hide me' 'from the wrath
to come.' (Mat 3:7) 'Thou art my Hiding place.'

He who brings the flood has provided the Ark. And the door is open. It
*will* be shut some day-it may be shut to-morrow. What will you do if
you find yourself not shut *in*, (Gen 7:16) but shut *out?* Whose fault
is it if you do not enter in and be saved?

Noah did not put it off. He and his family entered (Jhn 10:9) the
self-same day into the Ark. I wonder if any of Noah's acquaintances (Luk
17:27) were thinking about coming when the flood over-took them, and
even coming 'gradually' nearer! We are told that Noah *only* (Gen 7:23)
remained alive, and they that were with him *in* the Ark.' Then, once
more, '*Come* thou into the Ark,' that when the 'great and terrible day'
(Joe 2:31) comes, you may be 'found of Him in peace,' 'found *in* Him.'

> The rising tempest sweeps the sky,\
>  The rain descends, the winds are high;\
>  The waters swell and death and fear\
>  Beset thy path, no refuge near;\
>  Haste, traveller, haste!\
>
> Oh, haste! a shelter you may gain,\
>  A covert from the wind and rain,\
>  A hiding-place, a rest, a home,\
>  A refuge from the wrath to come:\
>  Haste, traveller, haste!
>
> *W.B. Collyer*
# Drawn into the Ark

**SIXTH DAY - *DRAWN INTO THE ARK.***

"Thou shalt come into the Ark." (Gen 6:18)

You would like to take this great step out of danger into safety; but
you find it very hard, though it sounds very easy. You feel as if you
had spiritual nightmare,-seeing the danger, and not able to stir hand or
foot to escape it. (Rom 5:6)

Perhaps every one who comes to Christ has this sense of utter
helplessness about it. This is because the Holy Spirit must convince us
that the whole thing is God's doing, and not ours, so that He may have
*all* the glory of saving us from beginning to end. It is not at all
because He is not willing to save us, (Isa 59:16) but just because He
*is* willing, that He lets us find out for ourselves that our own will
is so numb that it cannot rouse and move (Jhn 5:7-8) without the fire of
His love and grace.

Now just trust His promise, 'Thou shalt come into the Ark;' in other
words, believe that His power and love are even now being exerted upon
you, and that your sense of helplessness is only part of His wonderful
way of drawing you to Jesus. God the Father is 'not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance.' (1Ti 2:4)

Then why do any perish? Simply because they *won't* come; because they
will not yield to the winning love and the 'drawing' power which is now
being put forth to save you, if, as you read this, you *want* to be
saved. There is no sadder word in the Bible than 'Ye *will* not come to
Me, that ye might have life.' (Jhn 5:40) But if you are saying, ever so
feebly and faintly, 'I will,' God meets it with His strong and gracious
'Thou *shalt*.'

Do not fear to take the '*Thou*' to yourself. (Rev 22:17) Remember the
great 'Whosoever will,' and look up at this star of promise in the dark,
'Thou shalt come into the Ark.' Jesus said, 'All that the Father giveth
Me *shall* come to Me.' (Jhn 6:37) And the Father says, 'I will cause
him to draw near, and he shall approach unto Me: for who is this that
engaged his heart to approach unto Me?' Whose heart? Is it not yours?
You would hardly be reading these pages, if your heart were not at all
engaged to approach unto Him. And if it is so engaged, who engaged it?
Who but the God from whom alone '*all* holy desires do proceed'?

Then go on a few verses farther, and see the word of the Lord to you.
'Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love; *therefore* with
loving-kindness have I drawn thee.' (Jer 31:3) Now do not wrong, and
wound, and insult that tremendous love by refusing to believe it. He is
at this moment giving you the personal proof of it, by 'drawing' you
even for these few minutes. Do not resist the half-formed wish to come
to Jesus. It is very solemn to realize that this is no less than the
Father's own drawing of you to His dear Son. (Jhn 6:44) Without it you
could not come, because you know you would have refused to come; but
with it, if only you yield to it, 'thou *shalt* come into the Ark.'

When the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and returned to
Noah because the waters were on the face of the whole earth, 'then he
put forth his hand, and took her, and pulled her in' (margin, 'caused
her to come') 'unto him into the Ark.' What a beautiful picture is this
little helpless tired dove of our helplessness and weariness, and the
kind Hand, strong and tender, which does not leave us to flutter (Isa
60:8) and beat against a closed window, but takes us, and *pulls* us
'*unto* Him *into* the Ark!'

So we have the willingness (Luk 14:23) of the Father in one part of the
type, and the willingness of the Son in another part,-willingness to
receive you into safety and rest. (Jhn 12:32) Then 'Come *thou* unto the
Ark!'
# Coming for Rest

**SEVENTH DAY - *COMING FOR REST.***

"Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden,\
 and I will give you rest." (Mat 11:28)

'This is *not* your rest.' God says so, and therefore it is no use
seeking or hoping or trying for it. You may as well give up first as
last. The dove found no rest for the sole of her foot till she came to
the Ark; (Gen 8:9) and neither will you. And the end of the dreary vista
(Rev 14:11) of unrest all through the years of a life without Christ,
is, 'They have no rest day nor night.'

'The people shall weary themselves for very vanity.' Do you know
anything about that? 'They weary themselves to commit iniquity.' 'Thou
art wearied in the greatness of thy way.' Do these words come home to
you? Or, 'But now He hath made me weary; Thou hast made desolate all my
company'? (Job 16:7) Whether it is the weariness of sin or of sorrow, of
vanity or of desolation (and sooner or later the one must lead into the
other), the gentle call floats over the troubled waters, 'Come unto Me,
all ye that labor (or 'are weary') and I will give you rest.'

But stay; you may, or rather you must, put in a double claim to the
promise. You may not be, consciously, particularly weary of laboring;
but, whether conscious of it or not, you *are* heavy laden, (Isa 1:4)
unless the one great burden of sin is taken away from you. It is a fact,
whether the Holy Spirit has convinced (Jhn 16:8-9) you of it or not as
yet, that unless your iniquity is taken away by personal washing in the
only Fountain, you are in the position described in the 38th Psalm, (Psa
38:4) 'Mine iniquities are gone over my head; as an heavy burden, they
are too heavy for me.' So much too heavy for you, that if you do not
accept Christ's offer of rest from that burden, you will never be able
to find or follow the path of life. But why bear it one minute longer,
when Jesus says, 'Come unto Me, all ye that are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest'? (Mat 11:28)

'He hath given us rest by *His* sorrow, and life by His death;' 'rest
from *thy* sorrow, and from thy fear, and from thy hard bondage wherein
thou wast made to serve.' (Isa 14:3) Come and take the gift! It is
gloriously real. It is no mere slight and temporary sense of relief. 'We
which have believed *do* enter into rest.'

And He gives us 'rest on *every* side,'-complete rest, (1Ki 5:4) guarded
and sheltered all round.

It is not only rest *from* all the weariness and burdens, but rest *in*
Himself. Jesus is spoken of in type as 'the Man of Rest,' (1Ch 22:9)
'and His rest shall be glorious.' It is this, His own Divine rest, that
He will give.

'This is the rest wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest.' Is it not
worth having? Will you not come for it? You *cannot* have it without
coming to Jesus; (Hsa 13:9) but only come, and it shall be yours-for
there stands His word-and 'in returning and rest shall ye be saved.'

> I heard the voice of Jesus say,\
>  'Come unto Me and rest;\
>  Lay down, thou weary one, lay down\
>  Thy head upon My breast.'\
>  I came to Jesus as I was,\
>  Weary, and worn, and sad;\
>  I found in Him a resting-place,\
>  And He has made me glad.
>
> *Dr. H. Bonar*
# Want of Will

**EIGHTH DAY - *WANT OF WILL.***

"Ye will not come to Me, that ye might have life." (Jhn 5:40)

It is almost certain that some whose eyes glance over these pages will
be conscious that they do not very much care to come to Christ; for this
is at once the commonest and the most fatal hindrance. You cannot
honestly say that you *want* to come. (Hsa 7:11) You perhaps go so far
as to say, with momentary seriousness, 'I wish that I wished!' but no
farther. In your inmost heart you would rather be 'let alone,' not
considering that *that* is the most terribly certain beginning of doom.
You are not perfectly comfortable, but you are not so uncomfortable as
to feel inclined to make any effort. (Isa 64:7) And as long as you can
keep from thinking about it, you *say* you are 'very happy.' Now believe
me, yours is a ten times worse and more dangerous state (Mat 9:12) than
if you were a condemned murderer, knowing his doom, realizing his sin,
and *therefore* seeking the Saviour and coming to Him 'with all the
desire of his mind.' (Deu 18:6)

For so long as you are not willing, *i.e.*, not actually and actively
willing to come (for that is the meaning of the original), of course you
cannot come. And without coming to Jesus you cannot have life. (1Jo
5:12) And if you do not have life, there is nothing but death for
you,-the second death with all its unknown terrors, into the realities
of which any moment may plunge you. Your not believing this makes no
difference to the fact. (Rom 3:3-4) Your doubting it makes no difference
to its certainty. I assert it on the authority of the Word of God. 'I
call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set
before you life. and death. Therefore choose life.' (Deu 30:19) For in
not willing life, you are willing death, and 'why will ye die?'

*Why?* Is it not utterly unreasonable? Would any but a lunatic walk with
mirth and fun over the thin crust which hides unknown depths of boiling
lava? Would you enjoy a picnic in the midst of it? Yet this is less mad
than what you are doing.

Then you will say, 'I can't help it! I can't make myself care!' Exactly
so; and just in this fact lies, not your excuse, but your one hope and
help. You cannot make yourself care to flee from the wrath to come. (Mat
3:7) You cannot rouse yourself to be willing to come to Christ for
salvation. But One can. And you may and can ask for the Holy Spirit to
make you willing. You can say, 'O God give me Thy Holy Spirit to make me
willing to come, for Jesus Christ's sake.' God makes no condition
whatever as to giving this. The Blessed Spirit is promised most simply
and unconditionally 'to them that ask Him.' (Luk 11:9-13) *This* promise
says nothing even about desiring or thirsting; it premises absolutely
nothing, but comes to the lowest depths of sin-paralyzed will-it is only
and simply, '*Ask.* '

Remember that one spirit or the other is now working in you. It is very
awful to read of 'the spirit that now worketh in the children of
disobedience;' (Eph 2:2) and what is more direct disobedience than not
coming when Jesus calls? Therefore 'ask,' and ask at once, for the other
spirit, the Holy Spirit, who can make you 'willing in the day of His
power,' (Psa 110:3)-God the Holy Ghost, who 'worketh in us to will.'

Think of Jesus saying, 'How often would I,' 'but ye would not,' (Luk
13:34) *He* is willing.

May He give you 'one heart to do the commandment of the King!'

> Come, Holy Spirit, Heavenly Dove,\
>  With all Thy quickening powers!\
>  Come, shed abroad a Saviour's love,\
>  And that shall kindle ours!
>
> *Dr. Watts*
# The Call of the Spirit

**NINTH DAY - *THE CALL OF THE SPIRIT.***

"And the Spirit and the Bride say, 'Come.'"

Have you thought about 'the love of the Spirit'? (Rom 15:30) Have you
realized that God's 'loving Spirit' (Psa 143:10, P. V. B) says to you,
'Come'? Are you conscious that if you refuse to listen to this gentlest
call, you are 'grieving' the Holy Spirit of God,-'vexing' Him by the
rebellion to which this refusal really amounts,-'resisting' (Act 7:51)
the Holy Ghost, whose power alone can work in you the holiness without
which you can never see the Lord?

Every 'Come!' in the Bible is the call of the Spirit. For 'all Scripture
is given by inspiration of God,' (2Ti 3:16) and the 'holy men of God
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.' (2Pe 1:21) And every time
that a still small voice in your heart says 'Come,' it is the call of
the Spirit. Every time the remembrance of the Saviour's sweetest spoken
word floats across your mind, it is the Holy Spirit's fulfilment of our
Lord's promise that 'He shall bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you.' (Jhn 14:26) Last time those words,
'Come unto Me,' came into your mind, whether in some wakeful night hour,
or suddenly and unaccountably amid the stir of the day, did you think
that it was the very voice of the Holy Spirit speaking in your heart? Or
did you let other voices drown it, not knowing that the goodness of God
was leading you by it? (Rom 2:4)

Every time an ambassador of Christ bids you come, (2Co 5:20) and every
time that any one who loves Him tries to speak a word for Jesus to you,
it is the call of the Spirit and the Bride; for the Bride is the Church
of Christ, (Eph 5:25-32) and she is the privileged instrument through
which the clear music of the call is oftenest heard.

What makes you take the trouble to read this book? Why is there any
attraction at all for you in the subject? Is it not that the Holy Spirit
is causing your heart to vibrate, it may be but very feebly as yet, at
the thrill of His secret call? Your awakening wish to come is the echo
of that call. If you stop and listen, it will be heard more distinctly
and willingly. The call will grow fuller and stronger as you turn and
yield, and follow it. And the same blessed Spirit will give you power to
do this. (1Th 5:24) He will show you your need of Jesus, and He will
testify of Jesus to you, (Jhn 15:26) so that you shall be willing to
come. Do you feel very helpless about it? (Jhn 5:7) Do you wish you had
the mighty aid of the Almighty Spirit, so that you might rise and come
while Jesus of Nazareth passeth by? Then why do you not ask for it? Who
is to blame if you do not have what is to be had for the asking? (Luk
11:13) Christ Himself has put the promise in the very plainest words:
'Ask, and it shall be given you,' and 'Every one that asketh receiveth.'
(Mat 7:7-8) What could you wish Him to say more? What could He possibly
say more? Clearly, if you have not, it is because you ask not. (Jam 4:2)
But if you *are* asking for the Holy Spirit in the name of Jesus, you
have already the earnest of the Spirit, (2Co 1:22) and you shall have
more and more. So take courage!

But it is no light thing to put away a holy desire, however feeble;
because it sprang not from your own heart, but is the voice of the
Spirit saying, Come! It will not always speak, if not obeyed. Turn back
from Revelation to Genesis, and you find the shadow of the bright light
of the winning call in the unchanged warning note: 'My Spirit shall not
always strive with man.' (Gen 6:3) Not *always*, dear, unknown friend,
whom I would fain win for my Lord,-not *always*! But He is striving now,
He is calling now, 'today, if ye will hear His voice.' (Hbr 4:7) Listen,
yield, come!
# Come and See

**TENTH DAY - *COME AND SEE.***

"He (Jesus) saith unto them, 'Come and see.'"\
 "Philip saith unto him, 'Come and see.'" (Jhn 1:39, 46)

When Jesus had found Philip, Philip *knew* that he had found Him. And
the next thing to knowing that 'we have found Him' is to find some one
else, and say, 'Come and see!' I say it now to you, dear friend, known
or unknown, 'We have found Him!' (Jhn 1:45) 'We see Jesus!' If you only
knew the irresistible longing, the very heart's desire that you should
find and see Him too, you would pardon all the pertinacity, all the
insistance, (Jer 20:9) with which again and again we say, 'Come and
see!' The woman of Samaria left her water-pot, and went her way into the
city with the same message. 'Come, see a man which told me all things
that ever I did.' And we to whom Jesus has said, 'I that speak unto thee
am He,' (Jhn 4:26) cannot do otherwise or less.

It is not always very easy to say it. You little know how much it
sometimes costs us! You do not know that though the few words seem so
easily spoken, and you take them as a matter of course from us, because
you know we are of 'that way' (Act 19:9) of thinking, they may have cost
us not a little wrestling with God for faith and courage to utter them,
and an effort which will leave us weary and exhausted. But 'we cannot
but speak the things which we have seen and heard;' (Act 4:20) 'we also
believe, and *therefore* speak.' We have seen Jesus, and therefore we
must tell you of the sight, and entreat you to 'come and see.'
Understand or misunderstand us as you will, we must 'say, Come!' (Rev
22:17)

But what is it that we are so burningly eager for you to see? Very
likely you suppose it is just that we have a certain set of views that
we have taken up, and we want you to hold the same. You think it is
merely that we want to bring you over to our opinions, and that we want
to have the satisfaction of getting you to agree with us! Oh, how, wide
of the mark! It is no such thing. We are not speaking of what we think,
but 'we speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen.' (Jhn
3:11) We have seen by faith the only sight that is worth gazing upon,
the sight that satisfies the angels, the sight that is enough for the
joy and satisfaction of immortal vision throughout eternity. (Jhn 9:25)
One thing we know, that, whereas we were blind, now we see.

We see Jesus, as our Lord and God.

We see Him as the very Saviour we need, and the very Friend we craved.

We see Him as 'the Son of God who loved me and gave Himself for me.'

We see Him wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our
iniquities; our Substitute and our Sin-bearer.

We see Him, (Hbr 2:9) too, crowned with glory and honor, and we rejoice
in His glory and beauty; (Zec 9:17) we make our boast of Him.

If you say to us, 'What is thy Beloved more than another beloved?' We
reply, 'My beloved is the chiefest among ten thousand. (Psa 45:2) Yea,
He is altogether lovely.'

It is not at all only for your own sakes that we want you so very much
to come and see. We do want you to look and be saved. But our
earnestness has a stronger spring than even that. We love our Lord, so
that we cannot bear Him not to be esteemed aright. We cannot bear Him to
be thought little of, and to be misunderstood; (Isa 53:3) it is pain,
real pain, to us when He is not appreciated and loved and adored,-when
all that He has done is treated as not worth whole-hearted gratitude and
love,-when His great and blood-bought salvation is neglected. (Hbr 2:3)
For His own beloved sake, for His own glory's sake, we want you to come
and see, that you may love and bless and glorify Him!

But, remember, this is not only our feeble human entreaty; it is Jesus
Himself who first said, and still says, 'Come and see!' *He* says,
'Behold Me, behold Me!' (Isa 65:1)

I know what you will say when you have come. You will say, 'Howbeit I
believed not their words *until* I came, and mine eyes had seen it: and,
behold, the half was not told me. Thou exceedest the fame that I heard!'
(2Ch 9:6)

> O Master, blessed Master, it is hard indeed to know\
>  That thousands round our daily path misunderstand Thee so!\
>  Despised and rejected yet, no beauty they can see,\
>  O King of glory and of grace, beloved Lord, in Thee.\
>
> O Saviour, precious Saviour, come in all Thy power and grace,\
>  And take away the veil that hides the glory of Thy face!\
>  Oh, manifest the marvels of Thy tenderness and love,\
>  And let Thy name be blessed and praised all other names above!
# The Safe Venture

**ELEVENTH DAY - *THE SAFE VENTURE.***

"Bid me come unto Thee…And He said, Come." (Mat 14:28-29)

If Jesus says, 'Come!' don't you think you may venture?

Perhaps it is night in your soul,-as dark as ever it can be. It would
not be so bad if you could even distinctly see the waves of the troubled
sea on which you are tossing. (Job 16:16) You do not know where you are.
All seems vague and uncertain and wretched and confused. (Rom 7:15) And
though the Lord Jesus is very near you, though He has come to you
walking on the water, and has said, 'It is I, be not afraid,' (Mat
14:27) you cannot see Him, and you are not at all sure it is His voice;
or if it is, that He is speaking to you. So of course you are
'troubled.' (Job 23:15-17)

And if, in this trouble, you go on trying to steer and row for yourself,
these same waves will prove themselves to be awful realities, and you
will be lost in the storm. Do not venture that; but venture out through
the darkness and upon the waves at the bare word of Jesus.

You do not need even to say, 'Lord, bid me come to Thee!' for He has
done that already. Jesus has bid you 'Come!' (Mat 11:28) and the bidding
would be no more real if He opened the heavens, and said it again to you
from the right hand of the throne of God. So the only question is, Will
you venture?

True, it is but a word, but think Whose word! (Mat 24:35) Could the word
that Jesus Christ Himself uttered be a vain deceit? Is not the Person
the guarantee of the word? 'The word only' of the Son of God has proved
enough for every one of the great multitude that no man could number,
(Rev 7:9) and it will be enough for you.

It does not matter in the least that you cannot see, and that you cannot
feel, and that you cannot hear or distinguish anything else at all. It
does not matter in the least that you feel miserable and confused, (Isa
9:5) and that you don't know what will come next. It does not matter in
the least that you cannot exactly understand how this simple coming can
result in calm, and peace, and safety, and finding yourself at the land.
(Jhn 6:21) It does not matter in the least that the waters are casting
up all the mire and dirt (Isa 57:20) of all the sinfulness of heart and
life, the 'old sins,' and the besetting sins. It does not matter in the
least that all the winds of doubt (2Ti 2:13) seem let loose upon you,
boisterous and blowing from every point to which you turn. All this, and
everything else that is 'contrary,' (Mat 14:24) is only so much the more
reason for the simple venture. Just only you 'come!' And even if in the
very act of coming you are afraid, and think you are beginning to sink,
come on with the cry, 'Lord, save me!' and immediately Jesus will save
you, and with the strong grasp of His hand the unanswerable question
will come, 'Wherefore didst thou doubt?' (Mat 14:31) You need not say,
'If I perish, I perish,' for you will not perish, and cannot perish, in
this blessed venture of your soul upon His word. He 'will cause you to
know His hand and His might;' 'He will save, He will rejoice over thee
with joy; *He* will rest in His love,' and *you* shall rest in His love,
now and for ever.

'They shall know in that day that I am He that doth speak; behold, it is
I.' (Isa 52:6)

> Come, ye weary, heavy laden,\
>  Lost and ruined by the fall;\
>  If you tarry till you're better,\
>  You will never come at all.\
>  Not the righteous,\
>  Sinners Jesus came to call.
>
> Lo! the incarnate God, ascended,\
>  Pleads the merit of His blood;\
>  Venture on Him, venture wholly,\
>  Let no other trust intrude.\
>  None but Jesus\
>  Can do helpless sinners good.
>
> *Joseph Hart*
# Coming Boldly

**TWELFTH DAY - *COMING BOLDLY.***

"Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need." (Hbr 4:16)

'Therefore!' because we have 'such an High Priest,' touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, and in all points tempted like as we are;
(Hbr 4:14-15) because He is 'a Priest upon His throne,' ever living,
with His royal power to save to the uttermost, and His priestly power to
make intercession: 'let us *therefore* come boldly unto the throne of
grace.' (Hbr 4:16)

Boldness and faith go together; fear and unbelief go together. 'If ye
will not believe, surely ye shall not be established.' (Isa 7:9) It is
always want of faith that is at the bottom of all fear. 'Why are ye
fearful?' is the question for those 'of little faith?' (Mat 8:26) So, in
order to come boldly, and therefore joyfully, all we need is more faith
in the Great High Priest who sits upon the throne of grace.

Now, do not sigh, 'Ah, I wish I had more faith!' It will not come to you
by languid lamentations about your want of faith. (Eph 2:8) 'It is the
gift of God.' And if thou knewest this gift of God, and who it is that
only waits to be inquired of, that He may give it thee, surely thou
wouldst ask of Him! For He giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth
not,-not even with all your neglect of Him and His gifts. Just *ask*!
and He says, 'It shall be given you.' (Mat 7:7) 'Ye have not, because ye
ask not.' And let the least glimmer of dawning faith in your heart lead
you to go on asking, and to pray continually, 'Lord, increase our
faith.' (Luk 17:5) Then you will be able to come boldly; for 'in Christ
Jesus our Lord…we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith
of Him.'

People do not come for what they do not want. Until the Holy Spirit
shows us our need of mercy, and puts reality into the Litany prayer,
'Have mercy upon us miserable sinners,' we shall never come to the
throne of grace to obtain mercy.

'He that into God's kingdom comes,\
 Must enter by this door.'

So, if you have never yet felt that you could sincerely say, 'God be
merciful *to me* a sinner' (or, as the Greek has it more emphatically,
'to me, *the* sinner'), (Luk 18:13) and therefore have never yet felt
particularly anxious to come to the throne of grace to obtain it, I
would urgently entreat you to pray, 'Lord, show me myself!' When the
Holy Spirit answers that prayer, you will be eager (Luk 10:42) enough to
come and obtain mercy. It will be the one thing then that you will be
particularly anxious about.

Obtaining mercy comes first; *then* finding grace to help in time of
need. You cannot reverse God's order. You will not find grace to help in
time of need till you have sought and found mercy to save. You have no
right to reckon on God's help and protection and guidance, and all the
other splendid privileges which He promises to 'the children of God by
faith in Jesus Christ,' (Gal 3:26) until you have this first blessing,
the mercy of God in Christ Jesus; for it is '*in*' Jesus Christ that all
the promises of God are yea, and Amen. But He is 'rich in mercy,' and
'delighteth in mercy.' All who have come to the throne of grace for it,
'are now the people of God, which had not obtained mercy, but now have
obtained mercy.' And then no less surely will they, and do they, 'find
grace to help in every time of need.'

'Let *us* therefore come boldly!'

> Behold the throne of grace!\
>  The promise calls me near:\
>  There Jesus shows a smiling face,\
>  And waits to answer prayer.\
>
> My soul, ask what thou wilt,\
>  Thou canst not be too bold:\
>  Since His own blood for thee He spilt,\
>  What else can He withhold?\
>
> *John Newton*
# A Hinderance

**THIRTEENTH DAY - *A HINDERANCE.***

"First be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift."
(Mat 5:24)

It is a strange gift that we have to bring,-so strange, that it is in
one sense 'nothing,' and yet in another sense everything. He asks us for
it, saying, 'Give Me thine heart;' (Pro 23:26) and this heart of ours,
this gift that we are to bring, worthless and yet priceless, is one mass
of sins and burdens. Jesus asks for it just as it is, with all the sins
and all the burdens; and the moment it is given over to Him, the sins
are cleansed and the burdens are borne for us.

Do you wish to come to Him with it, and yet find that there seems
something preventing you from really doing so? If so, the verse at the
head of this chapter may throw God's light upon the secret obstacle. 'Is
there any secret thing with *thee?*' (Job 15:11) Christ will either
accept the gift altogether, or not at all. If there is something which
you do not really mean to do right about,-some sin which you have no
real intention of giving up,-it will be a fatal barrier. He forgives all
or none.

If you are but willing, His precious blood shall cleanse you from *all*
sin. (1Jo 1:7) But He does not save by halves; and if there is a sin
knowingly kept back, then 'ye are yet in your sins,' and 'thou hast
neither part nor lot in this matter; *for* thy heart is not right in the
sight of God.' (Act 8:21)

This may seem a very stern way of putting it; but when such tremendous
issues hang upon it, is it not folly to shrink from looking the matter
straight in the face? The Lord says, 'First be reconciled to thy
brother, and *then* come and offer thy gift.'

This may be literally your case. Some one may have somewhat against
you,-an old quarrel, or a fresh misunderstanding,-and you are too proud
to acknowledge your fault, or your share of it; (Jam 5:16) or you are
too timid, or even too idle to do so. When there are faults on both
sides, it is pretty often the one most in fault who is the least ready
to forgive. Now do look into the matter, and see if you are truly 'in
love and charity with all men.' (1Jo 3:10, 15) It is no use trying to
explain away your daily words, 'Forgive us our trespasses; as we forgive
them that trespass against us,' for Christ Himself has explained and
emphasized them. He said, 'But if ye forgive not men their trespasses,
neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.' (Mat 6:15) There is
no evading this. There is absolutely *no* forgiveness for you, if you do
not forgive; for 'who can forgive sins but God only?' (Mar 2:7)

And it is no use saying, 'Well, I will forgive, but I can't forget!' You
know quite well in your heart that the very tone in which you say that,
shows that you are not really forgiving, and God knows what is at the
bottom of your 'can't *forget!*' (Rev 2:23)

Don't turn round fiercely, and say, 'But if I can't, I can't!' For 'the
things which are impossible with men, are possible with God.'

Read the 45th of Genesis, (Gen 14:1-15) and see how Joseph forgave; and
remember that the same Spirit of God which was in him is freely promised
to you for the asking.

And then look at the still greater example of perfect forgiveness,-hear
the smitten King in His lonely death-agony saying, 'Father, forgive
them!' 'For He knew that forgiveness would raise them to the very level
of His throne; so He must have literally loved His murderers with the
love wherewith His Father loved Him.' Oh, it is not hard to forgive
anything, (Eph 4:32) when one looks away to the forgiveness of Jesus.

*Then* come and offer thy gift.
# The Entreaty to Come

**FOURTEENTH DAY - *THE ENTREATY TO COME.***

"Come near to me, I *pray* you.'

'There stood no man with him, while Joseph made himself known to his
brethren. (Gen 45:1) And he wept aloud.' They had hated him, conspired
against him to slay him, very nearly killed him, sold him into exile and
slavery, and here was the brother's recompense for all this-love! No
such exquisite story of love and forgiveness was ever imagined by any
writer; no such climax of tenderness as Joseph's words through his
tears, 'Come near to me, I pray you.' Only one thing surpasses the type,
and that is the antitype.

Our Elder Brother was more than 'very nearly killed.' He poured out His
soul unto death. We are not innocent of His blood; (Zec 13:6) for 'He
was wounded for *our* transgressions, He was bruised for *our*
iniquities.' 'Christ died *for our sins.*' Mark that,-not merely 'for
us,' but '*for our sins*,' for *yours*. And where has been the love and
gratitude (2Co 5:15) that you have owed Him all this time? Where has
been the mere acknowledgment of what He has suffered for your sins? He
did this for you, and because of you. And what have you done for Him,
and because of Him?

And what could you now expect from Him? What did Joseph's brothers
expect after their behavior to him? Well may the Lord say, 'I know the
thoughts that I think towards you-thoughts of peace and not of evil.'
(Jer 29:11) For just as Joseph's words to his brethren were not, 'Go
away, I will have no more to do with you,' so the Lord Jesus 'upbraideth
not,' but says, 'Come near to Me, I *pray* you.'

His whole life says it. It is the epitome of all He said and
did,-winning, beseeching, entreating the far-off to come nigh, giving
His own blood that they might be made nigh.

What is the eloquence of 'those wounds in Thine hands'? Are they not
always saying, 'I *pray* you'? For 'all day long I have stretched forth
My hands unto a disobedient and gain-saying people.' (Rom 10:21)

'All day long,' while you are dressing, and eating, and talking, and
laughing, and working or amusing yourself, Jesus is stretching forth His
hands to you, calling you, waiting for you, looking for the first little
thrill of recognition from you, saying, 'I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest, (Act 9:5) whom thou neglectest, whom thou grievest.'

Joseph's brethren were troubled at his presence. Do *you* reply,
'Therefore I am troubled at His presence; when I consider, I am afraid
of Him'? (Job 23:15) Would you, honestly; rather flee from His presence?
Stay and listen.

'Come near to Me, I pray you.'

There is forgiveness (Psa 130:4) with Him; will you not come and receive
it?-Forgiveness for you, though every sin of yours that is forgiven had
to be borne in His dying agony. (1Pe 2:24) His love has not changed from
the moment when He said, 'Father, forgive them.' What must that love
have been! And what must it be for you and me, for whom He cannot make
the gracious excuse, 'They know not what they do!'

Come *alone* (Gen 45:1) to Him, and Jesus will make known Himself and
His forgiving love to you.

> One there is above all others,\
>  Well deserves the name of Friend;\
>  His is love beyond a brother's,\
>  Costly, free, and knows no end:\
>  They who once His kindness prove\
>  Find it everlasting love.
>
> *John Newton*
# The Command to Come

**FIFTEENTH DAY - *THE COMMAND TO COME.***

"Come unto me…Now thou art commanded, this do ye,…and come."

We are too much inclined to forget that 'Come' is not merely an
invitation, but a command. An ordinary invitation can be accepted or
refused; but a Royal Invitation (Mat 22:2-3) is always a Royal Command,
giving no option, but requiring obedience. Therefore, just so long as we
are hanging back, just so long as we have not come to Jesus, we are
living in a state of actual disobedience to Him.

Joseph, whose dealings with his brethren are among the most beautiful
types, was to say to them not only, 'Come unto me,' but 'Now thou art
*commanded*, this do ye,-and come!'

The Lord Jesus, the King of Glory, has said the very same words, 'Come
unto Me!' (Mat 11:28) to you and me. And so we *are* commanded. There is
no excusing ourselves by any uncertainty about it. The very moment that
'Come' first fell on our heart, the command was upon us, and we were
responsible for obeying it. (Deu 30:11, 14) And every moment since, we
have been disobeying the plainest and sweetest word of command that ever
fell on mortal ear, unless we have really and truly 'come to Jesus.'

So it is not at all a light thing, but a heavy and tremendous sin in
which we are living,-the sin of direct and continued disobedience to
Christ.

If one *single* and *sudden* act of disobedience was enough to lose
Paradise (Gen 3:24) and lead to incalculable consequences (Rom 5:19) of
misery, what about this persistence in refusal to obey this strong and
gentle command, (Pro 1:24-26) clearly understood, continually
reiterated, and unmistakably personal, Christ's personal command to you
personally? 'Death without mercy' (Hbr 10:28-29) is as terrible a
punishment as can well be imagined; but what must be the 'much sorer
punishment' than *that* which is denounced by the Word of our God on
those who, instead of merely 'despising Moses' law,' have 'trodden under
foot the Son of God'?

We must not and dare not leave out of sight, the awful revelation that
it is the Lord Jesus Himself, the very same tender Saviour who now bids
you 'Come,' who will take vengeance in flaming fire on them 'that obey
not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, (2Th 1:7-9) who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord.'
(Mat 25:41, 46)

When I began to write this little book, I never meant to say all this. I
only wanted to win you by the sweet, sweet music of my Master's call. I
only meant to tell you of His patient, (Rom 10:21) forbearing love, (Rom
2:4) waiting so long for you, wanting you to come to Him. But what can I
do? (Luk 13:3) Half a truth is not 'the truth.' You may not like it; but
I dare not speak to you only smooth things, (Isa 30:10) I dare not shun
to declare unto you the whole counsel of God in this matter. (Act 20:27)
'I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God to do *less*.' I should
come under the awful condemnation of those who 'take away from the words
of the book,' if I did not tell the whole message. The Lord has said,
'Diminish not a word,' (Jer 26:2) and so I entreat you to look for
yourselves at the passages I have quoted, and '*hear* the word of the
Lord' in them.

Oh 'see that ye refuse not Him that speaketh!' If you do not obey the
'Come unto Me,' there remaineth nothing for you but the 'Depart from
Me.' (Mat 25:41)

> Life alone is found in Jesus,\
>  Only there 'tis offered thee,-\
>  Offered without price or money,\
>  'Tis the gift of God sent free.\
>  Take salvation,\
>  Take it now, and happy be!
>
> *Albert Midlane*
# Royal Largesse

**SIXTEENTH DAY - *ROYAL LARGESSE.***

"Come unto me: and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye
shall eat the fat of the land…Also regard not your stuff: for the good
of all the land of Egypt is yours." (Gen 45:18, 20)

'If I become a Christian, I shall have to give up so many things!'
Spoken or unspoken, this is the invariable thought of every one who has
not found Christ. The presence of this thought is an actual test as to
whether you have come to Him or not; for the moment you have really
come, you will know better!

'Giving up' this, that, and the other, is, a downright, *unfair* way of
putting it (Phl 3:7) unless, indeed, the magnificent gain is distinctly
set against the paltry loss. As well talk of an oak tree 'giving up' the
withered leaves which have clung to the dried twigs all the winter, when
the sap begins to rise fresh and strong, and the promise of all the
splendor of summer foliage is near!

The sons of Jacob were called away from their famine-stricken fields by
their brother, that they might be 'nourished' (Gen 45:11) by him, and
share his prosperity, and dwell 'in the best of the land;' receiving
from his hand a place and possessions far beyond what they had 'given
up.' Of course they could not have all this till they had actually come
to him! Before they came, they had only his bare word for it. But they
considered his word enough, and they came, (Gen 46:31) and he kept his
word to the full.

Not less, but infinitely more, does the Lord Jesus, our Lord and
Brother, hold forth to you. Is His word worthy of less belief? Over and
above the unspeakable gift of eternal life, He promises to those who
leave anything for His sake that they 'shall receive an hundredfold
*now, in this time!*' (Mar 10:30) Do you suppose He did not mean what he
said?

Listen again to the twin promises, negative and positive, in their
all-inclusive simplicity: 'No good thing will he withhold from them that
walk uprightly;' (Psa 84:11) and 'The Lord will give that which is
good.' And yet your secret feeling is, that if you come and give
yourself up to Him, you will have to go without all sorts of things (Psa
34:10) that you fancy are good and nice and pleasant, and that you will
find yourself let in for all sorts of things which do not seem to you
'good' at all! Is this fair, when he has said positively just the
opposite? Listen again to what he says to those who *have* come, and who
are His own: 'Whether…the world, or life, or death, or things present,
or things to come; *all are yours!*' (Job 36:11) What do you make of
that? It is not figurative, but perfectly true and literal. Only you
will never be able to understand it, (1Cr 2:14) until the next verse is
true of you: 'Ye are Christ's.' Then another verse will be true of you;
'Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which
is of God; that we might *know* the things which are freely given to us
of God.' Ask for that blessed Spirit of God, and you will receive it,
and *then* you will understand.' (Pro 28:5)

Knowing what he was purposing to do for them as soon as they came,
Joseph naturally said to his brethren, 'Also regard not your stuff; for
the good of all the land of Egypt is yours.' Take this advice, 'regard
not your stuff!' However much you have or may have to give up for
Christ, oh, *do* believe the words of His prophet: 'The Lord is able to
give thee *much more* than this!' (2Ch 25:9)

Can you not instinctively feel what a thrill of deep triumphant joy
there is in St. Paul's words: 'Yea, doubtless, and I count all things
but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord!'
Did you ever feel anything like as glad as that? Christ Jesus my Lord is
willing and waiting to give that same fulness of gladness and blessing
to every one who will take him at His word and come to Him.

Yes, to *you!*

> Oh, the happiness arising\
>  From the life of grace within,\
>  When the soul is realizing\
>  Conquests over hell and sin!\
>  Happy moments!\
>  Heavenly joys on earth begin.\
>
> On the Saviour's fulness living,\
>  All His saints obtain delight;\
>  With the strength which he is giving,\
>  They can wrestle, they can fight.\
>  Happy moments,\
>  When King Jesus is in sight!
>
> *Joseph Irons*
# Tarry Not

**SEVENTEENTH DAY - *TARRY NOT.***

"Come down unto me, tarry not."

It is just this 'tarrying' that is hindering so many from coming to the
Saviour. What reason could there be for Joseph's brethren to 'tarry' and
go on starving a little longer in their own land, (Gen 43:1-2) when
Joseph was waiting to settle them and their father and their whole
families in the land of Goshen 'in the best of the land'? And what
reason can there be for you to tarry, and go on starved and unsatisfied
a little longer, when the Lord Jesus is waiting to receive you into the
'pleasant land' of His all-satisfying love? Why tarry in the 'far
country' with the husks (Luk 15:13, 16) and the heart loneliness? 'Ye
shall haste!' said Joseph, for his heart was eager to do great things
for them.

If you grant the reality of Christ's love at all, (Rom 2:4) do you not
see that delay in coming down to Him, and hesitation in letting Him save
you in His own way (and there is no other), and putting Him off from day
to day, must be wounding His love?

Why *do* you tarry? Have you any reason whatever to give Him? 'What wilt
thou say?' (Jer 13:21) Do not flatter yourself that all this delay and
putting off is any preparation for coming, much less any part of coming
to Him. There are no steps in coming to Jesus. Either you come, or you
do not come. There is only the 'one step, out of self, into Christ.'
There are no gradations of approach marked out in His Word. If you think
there are, search and see; (Act 17:11-12) do not take my word for it;
look for yourself, and see what is the Lord's word about it.

You have nothing to gain, but very much, perhaps everything, to lose by
'tarrying.' You are accumulating the guilt of disobedience. You are, it
may be very unconsciously, hardening your heart, (Hbr 3:7-8) and making
the great step more and more difficult. Instead of being in a better
position for coming to-morrow, you will be in a worse one.

While you are doing nothing, the enemy is very busy strengthening his
toils around you, and they will be stronger tomorrow than today.

While you are, as you fancy, only lying still, you are drifting fast
down the stream into the stronger current, nearing the rapids, nearing
the fatal fall.

It is a question of life and death. 'Escape for thy life; look not
behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain.' (Gen 19:17) It is the
old story of

'If you tarry till you're better,\
 You will never come at all.'

I do not know any one promise in all the Bible for the lingerers. And if
you put yourself out of the sphere of God's promises, what have you to
found any hope at all upon?

'Tarry not!' Oh, If I could but reach you and rouse you!\

'And if I care for one unknown,\
 Oh, how much more doth He!'

For one who perishes through straightforward refusal, (Mat 22:3, 5)
there are probably thousands who perish through *putting off*. 'How
shall we escape if we' *refuse*-no, if we merely '*neglect* (Hbr
12:25)-so great salvation?'

> Yet there is room! The Lamb's bright hall of song,\
>  With its fair glory, beckons thee along.\
>
> Yet there is room! Still open stands the gate,\
>  The gate of love; it is not yet too late.\
>
> Pass in, pass in! That banquet is for thee;\
>  That cup of everlasting love is free.\
>
> Ere night that gate may close, and seal thy doom;\
>  Then the last, low, long cry,-'No room, no room!'
>
> *Dr. H. Bonar*
# Without Christ

**EIGHTEENTH DAY - *WITHOUT CHRIST.***

"At that time ye were without Christ."

I could not do without Thee, (Jhn 6:68)\
 O Saviour of the lost!\
 Whose precious blood redeemed me\
 At such tremendous cost.\
 Thy righteousness, Thy pardon,\
 Thy precious blood-must be\
 My only hope and comfort,\
 My glory (Gal 6:14) and my plea.\

I could not do without Him! (Psa 73:23)\
 Jesus is more to me\
 Than all the richest, fairest gifts\
 Of earth could ever be.\
 But the more I find Him precious,\
 And the more I find Him true,\
 The more I long for you to find (Psa 34:8)\
 What He can be to you.\

You need not do without Him!\
 For He is passing by; (Mat 20:30)\
 He is waiting to be gracious,\
 Only waiting for your cry.\
 He is waiting to receive you,-\
 To make you all His own!\
 Why will you do without Him, (Hsa 11:8)\
 And wander on alone?\

Why will you do without Him? (Hsa 13:10)\
 Is He not kind indeed?\
 Did He not die to save you? (Rom 5:8)\
 Is He not all you need?\
 Do you not want a Saviour?\
 Do you not want a Friend?\
 One who will love you faithfully,\
 And love you to the end? (Jhn 13:1)\

Why will you do without Him? (Jer 4:30)\
 The Word of God is true:\
 The world is passing to its doom,\
 And you are passing too.\
 It may be, no to-morrow\
 Shall dawn for you or me; (Pro 27:1)\
 Why will you run the awful risk\
 Of all eternity?\

What will you do without Him\
 In the long and dreary day\
 Of trouble and perplexity, (Isa 59:9-10)\
 When you do not know the way;\
 And no one else can help you,\
 And no one guides you right, (Jer 2:17)\
 And hope comes not with morning,\
 And rest comes not with night?\

You could not do without Him, (Rom 7:24)\
 If once He made you see\
 The fetters that enchain you\
 Till He hath set you free;\
 If once you saw the fearful load\
 Of sin upon your soul,- (Eze 33:10)\
 The hidden plague that ends in death,\
 Unless He makes you whole!\

What will you do without Him\
 When death is drawing near, (Eccl. 12:3)\
 Without His love-the only love\
 That casts out every fear; (1Jo 4:18)\
 When the shadow-valley opens,\
 Unlighted and unknown, (Job 8:13-14)\
 And the terrors of its darkness\
 Must all be passed alone?\

What will you do without Him\
 When the great White Throne is set,\
 And the Judge who never can mistake, (Rom 2:16)\
 And never can forget,-\
 The Judge, whom you have never here\
 As Friend and Saviour sought, (Mat 7:23)\
 Shall summon you to give account\
 Of deed, and word, and thought? (Mat 12:36)\

What will you do without Him\
 When He hath shut the door, (Rev 3:7)\
 And you are left outside, because\
 You would not come before; (Jhn 5:40)\
 When it is no use knocking,\
 No use to stand and wait, (Hbr 12:17)\
 For the word of doom tolls through your heart,\
 That terrible 'Too late'? (Luk 16:26)\

You cannot do without Him! (Jhn 14:6)\
 There is no other name\
 By which you ever *can* be saved,- (Act 4:12)\
 No way, no hope, no claim!\
 Without Him-everlasting loss (Mar 8:36)\
 Of love, and life, and light!\
 Without Him-everlasting woe, (Mat 25:41)\
 And everlasting night.\

But with Him-oh! *with Jesus!*\
 Are any words so blest? (Jhn 17:24)\
 With Jesus-everlasting joy\
 And everlasting rest!\
 With Jesus-all the empty heart\
 Filled with His perfect love! (Eph 3:19-20)\
 With Jesus-perfect peace below,\
 And perfect bliss above!\

Why should you do without Him?- (Jer 5:31)\
 It is not yet too late;\
 He has not closed the day of grace, (2Co 6:2)\
 He has not shut the gate.\
 He calls you!-hush! He calls you! (Mar 10:49)\
 He would not have you go,\
 Another step without Him, (Hsa 2:14)\
 Because He loves you so.\

Why will you do without Him?\
 He calls and calls again- (Jhn 7:37)\
 'Come unto Me! Come unto Me! (Mat 11:28)\
 Oh, shall He call in vain?\
 He wants to have you with Him; (Mat 23:37)\
 Do you not want Him too?\
 You cannot do without Him,\
 And He wants-even you! (Jer 31:3)
# Come Away

**NINETEENTH DAY - *COME AWAY.***

"My beloved spake, and said unto me,\
 Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away."

What a loving call! What astonishing condescension, that the Heavenly
Bridegroom should use such words to-whom? Would you not like to be able
to fill up that blank, and say, 'My Beloved spake, and said unto *me!*'

Perhaps you think this is too much for *you*. You feel too sinful and
unworthy to be so loved,-too defiled to be called 'my fair one.' (Eze
16:5, 14) If so, will you turn to a wonderful picture of those upon whom
He sets His love, and of what His love does for them, asking the Holy
Spirit to open your eyes while you read it, that you may behold wondrous
things out of it. (Psa 119:18)

I will not quote it here, because I want you to go to His own Book for
it. See in it how the Lord Jesus goes down to the very depths, (Psa
40:2) and begins at the very beginning. Your case is not deeper than
those depths; for it is even when we are *dead* in sins that the great
love wherewith God loved us reaches and raises us. (Eph 2:4-5) He says,
'Awake thou that sleepest, and rise *from the dead*, and Christ shall
give thee light.' You cannot be worse than 'dead;' and the very sense of
sin and death working in you is a proof that He has said unto you,
'Live!' (Eze 16:6)

The call to arise and come away is a proof that He is passing by. And
when Jesus passes by, He looks upon you, though you are not yet able to
see Him. And He says that when He does this, it is 'the time of love.'
(Eze 16:8) And oh, what *that* implies! What will He not do, when the
bright, warm, powerful rays of the love which passeth knowledge (Eph
3:19) are focused upon you, and He says even to you, 'My love!' giving
you the glorious right to respond, 'My Beloved!'

Read on, and see what He will do 'then!' '*Then*' the 'thoroughly' (Psa
51:2) washing and the anointing which prepares you for the delight of
the King. 'Then' the clothing, the girding and the covering, each with
their treasures of significance. (Psa 45:13) Then 'also' the decking and
the crowning, and the being made 'exceeding beautiful' and 'perfect
through My comeliness which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord God!
(Eze 16:14) When He puts the beauty of the Lord our God upon us, then He
can indeed say, 'My fair one!' 'Fair *only* with His comeliness;
otherwise the fairest natural character that was ever seen is 'black as
the tents of Kedar,'-those miserable goats' hair tents, which are to
this day the very type of the filthiest blackness. Yet with it, whatever
your natural character, and whatever your added deformity through having
been 'accustomed to do evil,' (Jer 13:23) you will be 'comely as the
curtains of Solomon,'-the type of all that is costly and beautiful in
colors and workmanship.

*Let* Him do all this for you! (Phl 2:13) Rise up and come away from all
that pollutes and separates you from Him. 'Shake thyself from the dust,
and arise!' 'Arise, shine, for thy Light is come!' 'Though ye have lien
among the pots, (Psa 68:13) yet' (when you come to the Light that is
come so close to you), 'yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove covered
with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold,' shining and gleaming as
you rise and come away, resplendent in the beams of the Sun of
righteousness. 'Rise, He calleth thee!' (Mar 10:49) 'Come away!'
# Coming after Jesus

**TWENTIETH DAY - *COMING AFTER JESUS.***

"Come and follow Me." (Mat 19:21)

Following is the only proof of coming.

There is hardly a commoner lamentation than this: 'I do not know whether
I have come or not!' (1Ki 18:21) And nobody ever says that with a happy
smile. It is always with a dismal look; and no wonder! When so much
hinges upon it,-poverty, or riches, safety or danger, life or
death,-uncertainty must and will be miserable. Now, do you really want
to know whether you have come or not? Our Lord gives you the test, 'Come
*and follow* Me!' (Mat 20:34)

If you are willing for that, willing with the will that issues in act
and deed, then the coming is real.

If you are not willing to follow, then you may dismiss at once any idea
that perhaps you have come or are coming: there is no reality in it, and
there is nothing for you but to go away sorrowful, as the rich young man
did, who 'came,' but would not 'follow.' (Mat 19:22)

The following will be just as real and definite as the coming, if there
is any reality in you at all; and if you are not deluding yourself with
a deceitful cloud-land of sentimental religion, without foundation and
without substance, which is but a refuge of lies, which the hail shall
sweep away. (Isa 28:17) Do not sit down in the most serious state of
uncertainty, but 'give diligence to make your calling and election
sure.' (2Pe 1:10)

But you say, 'How am I to know whether I am following?' Well, following
is not standing still. Clearly it is not staying just where you always
were. You cannot follow one thing without coming away from something
else. (Rom 6:2, 4, 13, 22) Apply this test. What have you *left* for
Jesus? (Mat 4:18-20) What have you left off doing for His sake? If you
are moving onward, some things must be left behind. What are 'the things
which are behind' in *your* life? (Phl 3:13) If the supposed coming has
made no difference in your practical daily life, do not flatter yourself
that you have ever yet really come at all. (Mat 7:21) Jesus says, 'If
any man will come after Me, let Him deny himself, and take up his cross
and follow Me.' (Luk 14:27) What light does that saying throw upon your
case? Be honest about it; all true coming *to* Jesus must issue in thus
coming *after* Him.

Then look at it from the positive side. He has left us 'an example that
ye should follow His steps.' As the beautiful collect puts it, 'Give us
grace that we may daily endeavor ourselves to follow the blessed steps
of His most holy life.' (Jhn 13:15) Now, what are those steps? Perhaps
you are not even looking to see what they are, let alone following them!
Following the *steps* is quite a different thing from thinking to follow
one's own idea of the general direction of a course. If you would only
take one Gospel, and read it through with the earnest purpose of noting,
by the Holy Spirit's guidance, what, the steps of Jesus are, you would
soon see clearly whether you are following or not, far more clearly than
by reading any amount of books about it, or consulting any number of
human counselors. Take for today only one indication of what those steps
were. 'Who went about doing good.' (Act 10:38) Do your steps correspond
with that? It is not, 'went about doing no harm,' but actively and
positively 'doing good.'

Oh, dear friends, they are 'blessed' steps all senses of the word! For
His ways are ways of pleasantness, and all His paths are peace. (Pro
3:17) Once fairly and fully entered, the paradox is always solved, the
self-denial (Jhn 8:12) is lost in the greater joy of pleasing Him, the
cross becomes a sceptre in the hand of His 'kings and priests.' (Rev
1:6) Then you shall 'continue following the Lord your God.' (Jhn 12:26)
And the end of the following is, 'that where I am, there shall also My
servant be.'
# Coming with Jesus

**TWENTY-FIRST DAY - *COMING WITH JESUS.***

"Come with Me."

'Come away' is not all that the Lord Jesus has to say to us. 'Come unto
Me' (Mat 11:28) and 'Come after Me' only lead up to the even more
gracious invitation, 'Come *with* Me.'

'Ye see your calling;' (1Co 1:26) it is nothing less than to come *with*
Jesus. The enviable privilege of the twelve whom Jesus ordained 'that
they should be with Him,' is freely offered to you. Will you avail
yourself of it? Will you come with Jesus, walking with Him from this day
every step of the way? Will you accept Him as the Guide with whom you
will go, (Jhn 6:68) the Friend with whom you will commune by the way? It
will be no dreamy or nominal coming with Him, if only you are willing to
come. You will find it very real in all respects.

You can never be so *really always* with any earthly friend (Pro 18:24)
as you can be with Jesus, and as you *will* be, if you accept the
invitation. For there are two sides to that 'with.' If you will but
*come with* Him, He will come unto you and *abide with* you. (Jhn 14:23)
Your natural fear lest, even when you consent to come to be with Him,
you might not remain with Him, is met and completely settled by His
promise, 'I will never leave thee.' (Hbr 13:5) And of course, if He
*never* leaves you, you will always be with Him. And if He has *said*
that, of course He will do it. (Num 23:19) So do not let *that*
objection come up again!

It is a very common experience in great things and small, that the
person or thing we most want is not there just when we most want Him or
it. Never shall we have to complain of this as to the promised perpetual
presence of our Lord; (Mat 28:20) for He says, 'I will be with him in
trouble.' 'When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee.'
(Isa 43:2) And in the deepest need of all, in the valley of the shadow
of death, (Psa 23:4) the soul that has yielded to the present call will
be able to say, 'Thou art with me!'

I do not think we consider enough how we disappoint the love of Jesus
when we refuse to come with Him. (Luk 13:34) For He does truly and
literally desire us to be with Him. Would He have made it the very
climax of His great Prayer, representing it as the very culmination of
His own rest and glory, (Jhn 17:24) that His people should be *with*
*Him*, if He did not so very much care about it, and was only seeking
and saving us out of bare pity? No, it was in His *love* as well as in
His pity that He redeemed us! (Isa 63:9) And love craves nearness. This
is the very thing that differences love from the lesser glow of mere
pity, or kindness, whatever their degrees or combinations. The Lord
Jesus would not say, 'Come *with* Me,' if He did not feel towards us
something far beyond any degree of pity and kindness. It is the Royal
Invitation of His kingly love.

But now what are you going to do about it? Hearing it, and thinking it
very gracious, and all that, is not enough. You must come to a point
about it. (1Ki 18:21) You must give as definite an answer to this as
mere common courtesy demands to any earthly invitation. Giving *no*
answer is an acknowledged insult. Will you treat the King thus? And if
not, what shall your answer be? You must give it yourself. Christ
Himself is waiting for it. (Jhn 6:67)

There is a beautiful type which tells us how a maiden (Gen 24:1) was
chosen to be the bride of the son of 'a mighty prince' in a far off
land. She was to answer for herself about it, and so 'they said, We will
call the damsel and enquire at her mouth. And they called Rebekah, and
said, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I *will* *go*.'

Shall this be *your* answer today?
# The Living Water

**TWENTY-SECOND DAY - *THE LIVING WATER.***

"If any man thirst, let him come unto Me, and drink." (Jhn 7:37)

The Invitation could not have been given in any wider form. Neither
could it have been given in any form which so certainly concentrates all
its light and warmth on one point, that point yourself!

First, there is the grand sweep of the '*any*' man. Instead of
amplifying this into a list of all possible varieties of 'rich or poor,
old or young,' and so on, just never mind about these usual human
paraphrases, which may or may not seem to include you, and come face to
face with the magnificently simple word of our Lord, 'Any!' and know
that it means '*you!*' for you cannot possibly get outside of this great
circle, described by the hand of Infinite Love. You cannot possibly say
it does not include you. Words mean nothing, if this word does not mean
that you, whose eyes now rest upon it, are included and intended. To you
the Lord Jesus says, 'Let him come unto Me.'

But another word is appended which seems at first sight to be a
limitation. 'If any man *thirst*, let him come.' (Rev 21:6) *Is* it a
limitation? Ask your own heart! Is there *any* one who does not thirst?
In other words, is there any one who can say before God who searches the
heart, (Eze 11:5) 'I am satisfied. I have no sense of thirst, no
nameless craving'? Are *you* satisfied? I do not mean, are you tolerably
contented and comfortable on the whole and in a general way when things
are at their best? But, *satisfied!*-the deep under-the-surface rest and
complete satisfaction of the very heart, the filling of its emptiness,
the stilling of all its cravings; and this not during the false frothing
of excitement or business, but when you are alone, when you lie awake in
the night, when you are shut away from any fictitious filling of your
cup, and when the broken cisterns have leaked out, (Jer 2:13) as they
will, and do, and must-are you satisfied then? Verily, He who knew what
was in man knew that He was not narrowing the invitation when He said,
'Let him that is athirst come!' (Rev 22:17)

Did you ever think *why* it is so utterly hopeless and useless to try to
quench that inner thirst with anything but the living water, 'the supply
of the Spirit of Jesus Christ'? He has said plainly and positively that
you shall not succeed! He hath said, 'Whosoever drinketh of this water
*shall* thirst again.' (Jhn 4:13) You see there is no chance for you,
for His word cannot be broken, and He says you '*shall* thirst again.'
There are only two issues of that perpetual thirst. One is the
unanswered entreaty for a drop of water, only so much as the tip of a
finger (Luk 16:24) may bear, not to quench the unquenchable thirst, but
only to *cool* a flame-tormented tongue. The other, the *only* other, is
'Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never
thirst.' And lest our slow perceptions should fail to grasp the fact in
the figure, the Lord Jesus repeats the promise, and says, 'He that
believeth on Me shall never thirst.' (Jhn 6:35) Never! for 'He
satisfieth the longing soul.'

'Let him come *unto Me*, and drink.' You see there is only this one way
of drinking of the living water: you must come to Jesus Himself,
personally and really. Knowing all about it is not enough. Consulting
Christian friends, and reading good books, and doing any amount of
religious duties, and exercising any amount of self-denial, will not
stay the more or less conscious heart-thirst. The Lord says not a word
about any channels; He only says, 'If any man thirst, let him come unto
Me, and drink.' And 'Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life
freely.' (Rev 22:17) Will not *you* come?
# The Bread and Wine

**TWENTY-THIRD DAY - *THE BREAD AND WINE.***

"Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled."

In several chapters of Proverbs the Lord Jesus Christ is beautifully
described under the figure of Wisdom. For He is 'the Wisdom of God,' and
He is 'made unto us Wisdom.' (1Co 1:24, 30)

In this verse He gives a double Invitation,-to eat of His bread, and
drink of His wine. These are the symbols of life and joy-His life and
His joy.

'Come, eat of My bread.' 'Feed on Him in thy heart by faith, with
thanksgiving.' For Jesus Himself is the true Bread from heaven. (Jhn
6:51) And he that eateth of this Bread shall live for ever. For He is
the Bread of Life, (Jhn 6:48) life-giving and life-sustaining.

How shall we eat? It is the old story,-only coming, only believing! For
'he that cometh to Me shall never hunger,' (Jhn 6:35) and 'we are made
*partakers* of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence
steadfast unto the end.'

It is not a mere tasting or a bare subsisting to which Christ invites
us. He says, 'Eat, O friends; drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.'
For 'I am come that they might have life, (Jhn 10:10) and that they
might have it more abundantly;' fulness and vigor of life, abounding
pulses of vitality, fresh and strong; life that shall not and cannot
fail, for 'He ever liveth,' (Hbr 7:25) and 'because I live, ye shall
live also.'

How often we have sung, 'He hath filled the hungry with good things!'
Are you hungry? Come, eat of His bread, leaving the husks and ashes (Luk
15:16) and you shall know what it is to be filled with good things. For
'He filleth the hungry soul with goodness.' (Psa 107:9)

It is not only the solid life-need of bread that is provided at the
feast which the Lord has made for us, but Wine, the symbol of joy, 'that
maketh glad the heart of man.' (Psa 104:15) 'Come, buy wine and milk
without money and without price,' because the price is already paid for
it. His sorrow was the price of the joy offered to us. He poured out his
soul unto death, that He might pour out His joy into our lives. (Isa
53:12) He emptied the cup which His Father gave Him, that He might fill
ours till it runs over. (Psa 23:5) Without price to us,-but oh, the
price to Him!

The Lord Jesus says it is wine which He has *mingled*. Not all one kind,
but mingled by Divine care and skill into a perfect draught of manifold
gladness. 'If they obey and serve Him, they shall spend their days in
prosperity, and their years in pleasures.' (Job 36:11) *That* is the
heritage of the servants of the Lord! (Isa 65:13-14) Did you think it
was so pleasant? Did you know that He meant you to spend your years in
pleasures *here*, as well as to give you the pleasures for evermore
hereafter? (Pro 3:17) 'Come, drink of the wine that He has mingled,' and
you will find out what these pleasures are, and how exceedingly real
they are! No wonder you are a little skeptical about it! for 'eye hath
not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the
things which God hath prepared for them that love Him; *but*,' notice
now exactly what is said, '*God* HATH *revealed them unto us by His
Spirit*.' (1Co 2:9-10) So, unless or until God reveals them to you by
His Spirit, you cannot see or conceive what these pleasures are which He
has prepared for those who love Him,-what this wine is which He has
mingled for those who come to Him. Oh taste and see! (Psa 34:8) Come,
and put your trust under the shadow of His wings; and *then* you shall
be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of His house, and He shall make
you drink of the *river* of His pleasures. (Psa 36:7-8)
# Will You Not Come?

**TWENTY-FOURTH DAY - *WILL YOU NOT COME?***

"Thou hast received gifts for men: yea, for the rebellious also." (Psa
68:18)

Will you not come to Him for life?\
 Why will ye die, oh why?\
 He gave His life for you, for you!\
 The gift is free, (Rom 6:23) the word is true!\
 Will you not come? oh, why will you die?\

Will you not come to Him for peace- (Act 10:36)\
 Peace through His cross alone?\
 He shed His precious blood for you; (1Pe 1:19)\
 The gift is free, the word is true!\
 He is our Peace! oh, is He your own?\

Will you not come to Him for rest? (Jer 6:16)\
 All that are weary, come!\
 The rest He gives is deep and true; (Isa 11:10)\
 'Tis offered now, 'tis offered you!\
 Rest in His love, and rest in His home. (Hbr 4:3, 9)\

Will you not come to Him for joy,- (Mat 13:44)\
 Will you not come for this?\
 He laid His joys aside for you, (Phl 2:7-8)\
 To give you joy, so sweet, so true!\
 Sorrowing heart, oh, drink of the bliss! (Rom 15:13)\

Will you not come to Him for love-\
 Love that can fill the heart, (Psa 107:9)\
 Exceeding great, exceeding free?\
 He loveth you, He loveth me! (Rev 1:5)\
 Will you not come? Why stand you apart?\

Will you not come to Him for *all?*\
 Will you not 'taste and see'? (Psa 34:8)\
 He waits to give it all to you;\
 The gifts are free, the words are true! (Mat 7:7-8)\
 Jesus is calling, 'Come unto Me!'
# Come Near

**TWENTY-FIFTH DAY - *COME NEAR.***

"Come ye near unto Me."

'She obeyed not the voice;…she trusted not in the Lord, she drew not
near to her God.' (Zep 3:2) What was her portion? 'Woe to her?'

'But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, though we thus
speak.' (Hbr 6:9) For Jesus says that if He is lifted up, He will draw
all men unto Him. And it is the Lord Jesus Himself (see context) who
says, 'Come ye near unto Me, hear ye this!' (Isa 48:16) No matter how
far off you may be, this call of peace is to you who are far off. And if
you hearken, then shall your peace be as a river. (Isa 48:18) And if you
have already come to Jesus, still He says to them that are nigh, 'Now ye
have consecrated yourselves to the Lord, come near,'-nearer still,
closer and closer to the Lord who loves you.

There is only one way of coming near or being made near, but that way is
open for you. Not into the outer court of religious profession, but
'into the Holiest,' (Hbr 10:19) into the reality of most sacred nearness
to your Lord, you may enter 'by the blood of Jesus.' The moment you
claim by faith the power of that precious blood, (Hbr 13:12)-the moment
you let your Great High Priest put it upon you, that moment 'ye who
sometimes were far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ.' Then,
having this High Priest, (Hbr 4:14) and having this one blessed and
unfailing means of access, 'let us draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of faith.' (Hbr 10:22)

Do not be discouraged from coming near because you feel far off. Take
that rather as your very claim to be included in the call, for He says,
'Hear, ye that are far off, what I have done!' and take it as your very
reason for coming; (1Pe 1:19) come just because you *are* 'a great way
off,' for He says, 'They that are far off shall come.' (Zec 6:15)

If you feel very powerless about it, plead and claim the promise of His
enabling grace, 'I will cause him to draw near.' (Jer 30:21) And then
you will find that 'blessed is the man whom Thou choosest, and causest
to approach unto Thee;' and your experience will be, 'It is good for me
to draw near unto God.'

He who causes you to come near will keep you near. Joseph did not only
say to his brethren, 'Come near to me,' in that moment of tenderest love
when he made himself known to them, but his promise was, 'And thou shalt
be near unto me.' (Gen 45:10) This is your calling. Never to be far off
any more! Never any more distance and separation! Never any more
wandering in the far country without God, but henceforth to be 'a people
near unto Him!' (Psa 148:14) 'No more strangers and foreigners, but
fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God,' having
found the very home of the weary heart, from which you shall no more go
out. (Rev 3:12)
# To the Uttermost

**TWENTY-SIXTH DAY - *TO THE UTTERMOST.***

"But this man, because He continueth ever, hath an unchangeable
priesthood. Wherefore He is able also to save them to the uttermost that
come unto God by Him." (Hbr 7:24-25)

'And suppose I do come, what then? Suppose I do receive all this
blessedness today, what about to-morrow?' Something like this thought is
very often in the minds of those who see the lions not only outside but
inside the doors of the House Beautiful. But it is all met by that
wonderful word, 'to the uttermost.'

This does not only mean that the Lord Jesus is able to save out of the
uttermost depth of need and misery and sin, (Psa 86:13) and that He is
able to save from the uttermost regions of distance and despair. It
means all that, but more besides. It is not only bringing you up out of
the horrible pit and miry clay, but setting your feet upon a rock, and
establishing your goings. (Psa 40:2)

The word is one of those remarkable compound ones for which we have no
equivalent. It means that He is able to save unto all completeness, unto
the total perfection of saving. (Jer 17:14)

Suppose I were drowning, and you drew me out of the deepest water, just
in time to save my life, but then left me wet and shivering and
exhausted on the bank, to run the more than risk of wretched
after-effects of cold and rheumatism, from which I might never entirely
recover! That would not be saving 'to the uttermost' in this sense of
the word. But if you did the thing completely,-carrying me home, and
doing everything necessary to restore me, and avert ill effects, and
that effectually; never relaxing in care and effort, nor letting me go,
till you had me safe and well, however long and difficult it might be,
then you would have saved me 'to the uttermost,' in the true meaning of
it.

This is what Jesus is able to do for you. Your first coming to Him is
only like letting Him grasp you in your terrible danger, and draw you
out of the fatal depths. But 'because He continueth ever,' (Hbr 7:24)
always the same loving and faithful Saviour, He will complete what He
begins. For we are 'confident of this very thing, that He which hath
begun a good work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.'
(Phl 1:6) Having saved you from destruction, His very name is the
guarantee that He will not leave you to struggle helplessly with your
sins, (Mat 1:21) much less to 'continue' in them, but that He shall save
you from them. You will find it a daily continual salvation, by which He
will keep you by the power of God through faith, unto the consummated
salvation of body and soul, 'ready to be revealed in the last time.'
(1Pe 1:5)
# The Proof of Christ’s Ability to Save

**TWENTY-SEVENTH DAY - *THE PROOF OF CHRIST'S ABILITY TO SAVE***

"Wherefore He is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto
God by Him, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for them." (Hbr
7:25)

See what is the proof that the Lord Jesus Christ is able to save you
thus, 'to the uttermost.' It is that He ever liveth to make
intercession. For whom? For them 'that come unto God by Him.' Or, as He
Himself said, in that wonderful prayer when He lifted the veil from His
own Divine communing with the Father, and let us hear His mighty
intercession: 'Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which
shall believe on Me through their word,' (Jhn 17:20)-thus again
identifying 'coming' with believing. Then, if you come, the perpetual
intercession of our ascended High Priest will be for you, always for
you. (Hbr 4:14) Only think that this is what Jesus is now living
for,-'liveth to make intercession' (Hbr 7:25) for you! Should we ever
have dared to imagine such grace and love? Should we ever have conceived
that such a privilege could be ours?

Only think what security there must be in it! (Jhn 10:28) If the Lord
Jesus is praying for you, can you perish? If He is praying for you, will
not the Father's answer of blessing be beyond anything you would ask for
yourself? Is not this enough to answer all your misgivings as to what
you will find and how you will get on when you have come?

There is a solemn side to it. He not only says nothing about making
intercession for those who do *not* come, but He plainly and positively
says, 'I pray *not* for the world, but for them which Thou hast given
Me;' (Jhn 17:9) the proof of having been *given* to Christ being the
*coming* to Him, for 'all that the Father giveth Me shall come to Me.'
Then face the terrible position which is yours if you will not come!
Christ will *not* pray for you! you shut yourself out from the prayer of
Him whom the Father heareth *always*. He prays *not* for all alike, but
only for those who receive His words. He says, 'I pray for them; I pray
*not* for the world.' You dare not and cannot explain this away. It is
no mere inference, no question of differing 'views,' but spoken by Him
whose words can never pass away. Will you not 'come,' and share in this
unspeakable privilege of Christ's intercession?

We must not overlook the fact that it is for those who 'come unto God by
Him.' Your coming to Jesus is also coming to your Father. In our right
earnestness to have clear views of the Trinity, we are liable to forget
the *Unity* of the Godhead. 'I and My Father are one,' (Jhn 10:30) saith
the Lord Jesus; and this blessed and glorious unity is our key to many
an apparent difficulty. Yet there is a Divine order in the approach,
which we invert at our eternal peril. It must be 'by Him,' or it is no
coming at all. For He hath said, 'No man cometh unto the Father but by
Me. (Jhn 14:6) The redemption of Christ is for them 'who *by Him* do
believe in God.' You *cannot* be made nigh to God except by the blood of
Christ. You *cannot* reach the Father except through the Son, for it is
through Him and in Him that we alone have access. (Eph 2:18) You
*cannot* offer thanks, any more than prayer, to God, except in the same
way, for it is 'by Him' that we are to offer it. In one word, you cannot
be saved any other way at all, except by Jesus, and it is no use talking
about being simply saved by God's mercy, for God's own Word says, 'There
is none other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be
saved,' (Act 4:12) so that fallacy is disposed of forever. So 'diminish
not a word'; (Deu 12:32) do not venture to leave out the words 'by Him,'
but come in God's own appointed way, and you shall be saved in His own
grand and perfect way, 'to the uttermost!'
# Continual Coming

**TWENTY-EIGHTH DAY - *CONTINUAL COMING.***

"To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but
chosen of God, and precious, ye also, as lively stones, are built up a
spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ." (1Pe 2:4)

'To whom *coming*.' Here is the secret of advance in the narrow way,
after we have entered by the Strait Gate. (Mat 7:14) It is not the
having come once and to begin with, but the coming continually to Jesus.
When we have once really come to Him, it is not only our privilege, but
our constant joy, to come to Him about everything-to go on drinking at
the fountain. It is a beautiful paradox which is realized and reconciled
in the experience of those who come, that we may be continually coming
afresh without ever going away,-always at the fountain-head, and yet
always *coming* to it.

As the first coming to Jesus gives us the true and only foundation, (1Co
3:11) so by the very same coming, continued with ever fresh peace and
joy, we shall be built up in Him. It is as we have received Christ Jesus
the Lord that we are to walk in Him; and then we shall be rooted and
built up in Him. (Col 2:6-7) Think what this building up implies! Coming
to Him, you individually, as well as all who come collectively, shall be
builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit, that
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, (Eph 3:17) that your bodies
may be the temple of the Holy Ghost. Coming to Him, you shall no longer
be a loose stone, lying about and getting weatherworn, but you 'shall be
built in the midst of My people,' saith the Lord.

Coming to Him, you shall also be built up as a holy and royal
priesthood. (1Pe 2:5, 9) For He that loved us and washed us from our
sins in His own blood, hath made us kings and priests unto God. (Rev
5:10) What does this priesthood involve, which the Lord has 'given unto
you as a service of gift'? Does it not involve the very point on which
you had a misgiving, namely, 'if I do come today, what about to-morrow?'
for the priests had everything provided for them. (Num 18:9, 14) When
they were set apart to the priest's office, they did not need to have a
thought or a care about their maintenance in it all the rest of their
lives. (2Co 6:10) When once this 'service of gift' was theirs, they were
joined unto the high priest himself, and shared his privileges and his
provision; they were given to him, and he was given to them. This
provision for them was 'all the *best* of the oil, and all the *best* of
the wine, and of the wheat, and the first-fruits,' (Num 18:12) Besides
'all the *best* thereof' of other things; 'for it is your reward for
your service.' And the Lord says, 'I will satiate the soul of my priests
with fatness.' They shall be abundantly 'satisfied with the
plenteousness of Thy house.' For 'His divine power hath given unto us
*all* things that pertain unto life and godliness.' (2Pe 1:3)

Coming to Him, you shall 'offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ.' You will offer by Him the sacrifice of praise
continually; (Hbr 13:15) and what can the angels do more? Continual
praise *must* be continual gladness. And when you are able to say, 'O
Lord, I will praise Thee; though Thou wast angry with me, Thine anger is
turned away, and Thou comfortedst me; behold, God is my salvation;
'then, and *therefore*, with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of
salvation.' (Isa 12:1-3)

This is what is before you, as soon as you come to Jesus. Thenceforth it
shall be continual coming, and that will be continual rest, continual
peace, continual joy. (Phl 4:4, 6-7)
# Fellowship and Cleansing

**TWENTY-NINTH DAY - *FELLOWSHIP AND CLEANSING.***

"Come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord."

It is not only the Spirit but the Bride who says, 'Come.' (Rev 22:17)
And it is remarkable that the Bride is never found saying 'Come' without
including herself. 'Come with *us*;' (Num 10:29) 'Come, and let us join
ourselves unto the Lord;' 'Come, and let *us* return unto the Lord;'
'Let *us* come boldly.' It is always 'us,' expressed or implied, though
the speaker be patriarch, prophet, or apostle. And you may be very sure
that those who venture to say, 'Come' to you, are truly and deeply
feeling the need of continual coming for themselves. (2Co 5:14) If the
Master's call were not sounding very fresh and sweet in their own
hearts, they would not be constrained to sound it out to you.

'Come ye,' then, 'and let us walk in the light of the Lord.' (Isa 2:5)
This is one of the blessed results and tests of true following, as
following is of coming. For the Lord says, 'He that followeth Me shall
not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.' (Jhn 8:12) And
the results of this walking in the light are fellowship and cleansing;
and these, when fully accepted, are all that we can need for the
brightest, happiest pilgrim course. 'If we walk in the light, as He is
in the light, we have fellowship one with another; and the blood of
Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all sin.' (1Jo 1:7) This is not
merely fellowship with other Christians, though that, with all its
warmth and pleasantness, is no doubt included. (1Jo 3:14) But scholars
tell us that the true meaning is that we and the Lord have fellowship
*with* *each other*-a marvellous mutual interchange of sympathy,
interest, and love. 'Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with
His Son Jesus Christ.' (1Jo 1:3) Fellowship implies a good deal more
than even friendship; the word is really 'communion,' in, its widest and
yet closest sense. It is literally having all things in common. It is
the Lord saying, 'Thou art ever with Me, and all that I have is thine.'
(Luk 15:31) It is our responding, 'My beloved is mine, and I am His.' It
is, 'All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's.' It is the
present fact, which yet we cannot fully apprehend, till 'at that day ye
shall know that I am in My Father, and he in Me, and I in you.' (Jhn
14:20) 'Come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord,' (Isa 2:5)
that this glorious fellowship may be ours. (Rev 3:4)

But there can be no fellowship without the cleansing. For how 'can two
walk together, except they be agreed?' And sin is the one great obstacle
to this agreement. (Psa 66:18) God never makes peace with sin. No
armistice, no truce, no compromise is possible! If you would read
through Jeremiah or Ezekiel with your eyes open to observe what God
thinks of sin, you would be perfectly startled. It leaves the impression
that no language can convey His indignant loathing of 'this abominable
thing which I hate.' (Jer 44:4) But this one precious promise shows it
all in a moment. The blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all
sin! 'If anything less than the blood of His own Son *could* have
cleansed us, would He not have spared Him? (Rom 8:32) Nothing shows us
the exceeding sinfulness of sin like this one word.

But oh, thank God for the 'all'! As nothing less than the blood of
Christ is needed for one single sin, so nothing more is needed for *all*
sin. Ask the Holy Spirit to open out this one word to you. (1Jo 1:7)
'All' the sin cleansed by it,- 'all' that separated between you and God
put away by it,-you yourself made nigh by it, and sanctified by it,-(Eph
2:13) the fellowship will be unbroken, the light will be unclouded, the
following will be faithful, (Zec 10:12) and the coming will be sealed.
# The Perpetual Covenant

**THIRTIETH DAY - *THE PERPETUAL COVENANT.***

"Come, and let us join ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual\
 covenant that shall not be forgotten." (Jer 50:5)

This is no external joining of church or congregation. 'He that is
joined unto the Lord is one spirit.' To this we are invited, (1Co 6:17)
-to be so joined that nothing shall separate; to be made one with Christ
in blessed and eternal union. (Jhn 17:23) The instrument, so to speak,
of the joining, is our consent, in faith and obedience, to the perpetual
covenant that shall not be forgotten. (Jer 1:5)

Herein lies the answer to all the distressing doubts about persevering
in which we 'err, not knowing the scriptures, nor, the power of God.'
(Mat 22:29) For see what the terms of the new covenant are! 'I will put
My laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will be
to them a God, and they shall be to Me a people.' (Hbr 8:10) This seems
all one-sided. It is all what God undertakes to do. Not a word about
what we undertake to do! How different from any human covenant!

Ah, the Lord tried us with the other way, and we failed; and so the old
covenant of works came to nought. (Jer 31:32)

It was not only the children of Israel who 'continued not' (Hbr 8:9) in
God's covenant; we have done just the same. We have proved in our own
experience that we cannot keep any one condition of it, let alone the
whole! (Rom 3:19, 23) And so the Lord makes a new covenant, in which the
marvellous terms are that He undertakes our part as well as His own, by
promising to put His laws into our minds and write them upon our hearts,
so that we may keep them and really obey them.

And when He says He will be to us a God, He has promised in that one
word more than mortal thought or mortal desire can reach. (Rev 21:3) And
when He says we *shall* be to Him a people, He guarantees us all the
safety and happiness, (Deu 33:29) and all the privileges and blessings,
in all certainty and perpetuity, which He promises to His people. (2Co
1:20) He knows our total weakness, and our utter inability to persevere,
and so He stoops to undertake the whole thing for us, if we will only
'come, and join ourselves to the Lord,' consenting to His perpetual
covenant, and accepting these wonderful provisions in simple faith.

But remember, there is no such thing as drifting into this covenant. We
shall never 'happen' to find ourselves included in it by waiting to see
what turns up, or by dint of admiringly contemplating it. We must
'*come;*' and we must join ourselves to the Lord in it by our own
voluntary act and deed. Each must 'subscribe with his hand unto the
Lord.' (Isa 44:5) This covenant requires the free individual signature
of each participator, so that each shall be able to say, 'Yet hath He
made with *me* an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure.'
(2Sa 23:5) Do you ask for some proof that you *may* thus come and share
its blessedness?-some distinct evidence that the covenant is meant for
you? The Lord, who has given all the rest, has given this too. You know
the freeness of the call, 'Ho, *every one* that thirsteth, come ye to
the waters.' (Isa 55:1) 'That is only the beginning of the Invitation.
It goes on, without a break, still to *every one*,- 'Incline your ear,
and come unto Me; hear, and your soul shall live; and I will make an
everlasting covenant with *you!*' (Isa 55:3)

> Oh, happy day that fixed my choice\
>  On Thee, my Saviour and my God!\
>  Well may this glowing heart rejoice,\
>  And tell its raptures all abroad.\
>
> 'Tis done! the great transaction's done:\
>  I am my Lord's, and He is mine;\
>  He drew me, and I followed on,\
>  Charmed to obey the Voice Divine.
>
> *Doddridge*
# The Consummation of the Invitation

**THIRTY-FIRST DAY - *THE CONSUMMATION OF THE INVITATION.***

"Then shall the King say unto them on His right hand,\
 'Come, ye blessed of My Father, inherit the kingdom prepared\
 for you from the foundation of the world.'" (Mat 25:34)

'Then!' when the sure but as yet unseen hope of the Church is fulfilled,
and Jesus comes in His glory: (Tts 2:13) 'then!' when all are gathered
before Him, (Mat 24:30-31) and He shall separate them one from another,
*then,* shall the King say unto them on His right hand, 'Come!'

The King-'this same Jesus,' who now says, 'Come unto Me,' 'whom I shall
see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another' (Job 19:27)
(margin, *not a stranger*)-He shall utter with His own gracious lips the
same sweet call; (Luk 4:22) and we shall hear it, no longer by faith,
but literally.

The call will be no longer, 'Come unto Me, all ye that are weary and
heavy laden;' (Mat 11:28) for the weariness and the burdens that have
been cast upon Jesus will be at an end for ever. (Psa 38:4) It will be,
'Come, ye blessed!' Not 'blessed' then for the first time, but 'ye'
whose position already is that of 'the blessed of the Lord.' Every one
who comes to Jesus takes that glorious position, and possesses all its
manifold privileges. (Eph 1:3) If you are only come today for the first
time, 'thou art *now* the blessed of the Lord,' (Gen 26:29) and you
shall be among the blessed ones who stand in their lot at the end of the
days. You are *now* made kings and priests unto God by Him who loved you
and washed you from your sins in His own blood; (Rev 1:5-6) and *then*
the King will call you to 'inherit the kingdom.' For 'by faith in Christ
Jesus' (which is the same thing, in other words, as coming to Christ),
you are 'the children (Gal 3:26) of God.' 'And if children, then heirs;
heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ.' (Rom 8:17) He will make you
inherit the throne of His glory, and grant you to sit with Him in His
throne, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom.
(Luk 12:32) Confess now, that this is doing for you exceeding abundantly
above all you asked or thought! To be permitted just to escape the
terrible doom of 'everlasting punishment,' just to get inside the door
of the palace, (Psa 45:15-17)-a sort of standing afar off, even in
heaven- is about as much as you really thought of! But look at the
grandeur of *His* thought, and the riches of His love for you! He has
prepared not only 'a place,' and 'a city,' (Hbr 11:16-18) but a kingdom
for you, and that not since you began to pray for salvation, but from
the foundation of the world. And all this time this splendid and
amaranthine inheritance (Mat 25:34-19) has been reserved in heaven for
you, and you are being kept by the power of God for it! (1Pe 1:5) Have
you thanked Him for this? It is not too soon to do so.

This is indeed the consummation of the Royal Invitation, the King on the
throne of His glory inviting you to come and reign with Him!

And 'this same Jesus' says to you today, 'Him that cometh to Me, I will
in no wise cast out.' (Jhn 6:37)

> Still shall the keyword ringing, echo the same sweet 'Come!'\
>  'Come' with the blessed myriads, safe in the Father's home;\
>  'Come!' for the toil is over; 'come!' for the feast is spread;\
>  'Come!' for the crown of glory waits for the weary head.
