# Dedication

**To the People of the Family**\
 **With whom we have fellowship**\
 **As concerning giving and receiving.**\
 \
 **The merciful and gracious Lord hath so done His marvelous works that
they ought to be had in remembrance.**\
 **He hath given meat unto them that fear Him.**\
 \
 \
 **THE ANGELS' SUMS**\
 When in this quiet room I write\
 Or do the angels' sums,\
 Among the cupboards and the books\
 A shining Presence comes.\
 I take each anna as a gift\
 From a supply divine.\
 Lord Jesus, as I write to friends,\
 I feel Thy hand on mine.\
 And so, as Thou didst long ago,\
 I too rejoice to be\
 About my Father's business,\
 In company with Thee.\
 G. W. P.
# Note to Edition of 1933

Everything has grown greatly since this book was written. The last few
chapters of *Gold Cord* tell something of this, though the book as a
whole deals more with the unseen things of our Fellowship life than with
the seen.

But we have left the story as it was first written, except for an
occasional omission or revision, and the word that was true when our
month's need was £5 10s. is as true now that it is about £700, and so
our song is still:

> Can God spread a table\
>  In the wilderness?\
>  Is our Father able?\
>  Praise Him, Yes.\
>  Glory, Alleluia,\
>  Gratefully we sing\
>  To our Unseen Leader,\
>  Lord and King.\
>  For His word is stable,\
>  He who yesterday\
>  Spread a bounteous table,\
>  Does today.\
>  A. C.

# 1. Jupiter's Moons

'You ought to tell it.'

It was an old friend, world-wide traveller and missioner, who was
talking, and I listened, unconvinced.

We had been spending an hour in 'going round,' a rather tiring round to
an old man in the heat; but he had asked to be shown all. So we had
shown the nurseries set in their fifteen acres of garden ground, whose
walls, coloured the soft red of the earth here, are covered in places
with the polished leaves and yellow bells of allamanda and whose house
gate is a mass of blue convolvulus. The other gate by which carts go in
and out has, in large Tamil characters, the word *Salvation* written up
high without, and *Praise* within; and those words preach all day long.
He had seen the children's little hospital, and the school-house, like
an old-fashioned house at home, built round a courtyard, and the bowery
porch-rooms open to the air, and used as class-rooms and play-rooms.
Then we had gone to the farm, and to the field where graft mangoes are
planted for future benefit, and where the big well, very deep all the
year round, gives the children splendid swimming joys. And finally we
had returned to the guest-room, where Dr. Inwood set forth his views in
the single authoritative sentence which begins this book.

And he talked to me awhile, meeting my objections, for I thought we had
written enough; showing me how because of our rather unique
circumstances we have a unique witness to bear.

'For instance, I thought So and So (he named a group of friends at home)
were behind you, and others think the same.' And I knew it was true. Not
one, but three separate groups are supposed to be behind us, three
stools between which we might so easily have fallen. And the wonder and
the joy is that we have not. 'It is of the Lord's mercy' as an old word
says. 'You ought to tell it,' he continued. 'It is keeping back
something that belongs to Him if you don't.'

Is it a far cry from such words to the words of Tobit, son of Tobiel,
who in the time of Enemessar king of the Assyrians was led captive from
Naphthali in Galilee? Here are the words of Tobit:

'And all her streets shall say, Alleluia; and they shall praise Him,
saying, Blessed be God which hath extolled it for ever.'

In Dohnavur we have a path twelve feet wide and two hundred long. It
ends in an ancient tamarind tree. Under this tree in olden days demons
were worshipped and false gods praised. Now two innocent swings hang
under the shadowy boughs. The walk is bordered by cork trees, with
flowers like glorified snowdrops hanging in scented clusters among dark
leaves. On either side are nurseries, each with a story of kindness
making an air of joy for it. In front, beyond a few low trees and roofs
rise the forms and, in certain lights, the wonderful colours of
mountains. If ever a street on earth had cause to say Alleluia this path
has. It is set about with beauty and the loving-kindness of the Lord.

A year and three months after that 'You ought to tell it,' on a quiet
moonlit morning before dawn, I walked up and down this path listening to
its Alleluia and wondering how I could cause others to hear it. I never
more feared to write any book, nor was ever more reluctant. But in the
pale blue of the southern sky, the Cross shone in the moonlight. And to
the west Jupiter, that matchless lamp of our February skies, led over
the sloping shoulders of the hills. Looking at these lights one took
courage.

Then the children, waking, ran out from the nearest nursery, 'Oh, please
show us Jupiter in the telescope! We have never seen his moons.' So we
carried the telescope out, and set it up and looked. There lay the great
lovely globe with two sparkling little moons above and two below. Those
small unimportant things did not say, 'What are we beside the great
planet? We will not shine.' And one of the thoughts that had held back
this writing had been, Are there not the great books, such for example
as those the China Inland Mission sends out to all who will read,
telling of provision in answer to prayer? What need then of a little one
like this?

So from those far distances, words went out to the end of the world from
the little moons of Jupiter. And in their sound was neither speech nor
language, but their voices being heard drew from me as an answer a
willingness to write. And now may He without whom all writing is ashes
and vanity, give and direct this little book.
# 2. The Sign

The work for the children dedicated, or about to be dedicated, or in
danger of being dedicated to the gods of South India, began with the
coming of the first Temple child in March 1901. The thought of money in
connection with it did not come to mind. The burden concerning them was
heavy. The relief of being able to do something was great. Quickened by
the sense of relief, the only thing we felt possible was just to go on,
using whatever there was in hand, and taking no thought for the morrow.
It was not the will of the Father that one of these little ones should
perish. That was enough to clear the way and carry us on in peace. But
one morning early in February 1904, something happened which brought the
thought of money to the front. A letter came from a trustworthy pastor
living in a Hindu town a day's journey distant: 'Can you send by
messenger at once a hundred rupees to me? The child of whom you know is
about to be dedicated to Siva. They have spent that sum upon the
festivities. I cannot get her unless I pay it. If possible, send it at
once.'

It was then about 10 a.m. If a messenger could be sent off within an
hour she might catch the train five or six hours' journey distant, and
be in that town by night. An hour's hesitation on the part of one who
had heard of her, had lost a child only a few days before. I dared not
hesitate. But to pay so much money straight to the devil did seem most
impossible. There was only time for a quick word asking for light, and
the guidance came so far as I knew it, 'Send the money.' So it was sent.

Then there was time to think. The child's story was this: Her father had
married out of caste. He had found it inconvenient and so he had hired
people who do such things to 'cause the wife to depart.' One night
therefore she quietly departed. As soon as the death ceremonies were
over he had let it be known that his only little daughter would belong
to the gods. We had heard of it when we stayed in the town, living with
this same pastor and his wife. We had tried hard to get the child then,
but had found it impossible, and the thought of that bright little girl
and her fate had never been forgotten. Now Ponnamal, the dear and
faithful Ponnamal, was on her way to save her. But that hundred rupees:
it felt like buying a soul.

Then and there it was borne upon me that this was the beginning of
something that would reach further than I had thought; there would be
disapproval, perhaps, to face; doubt there would certainly be. How could
I be sure my reading of our Lord's will was so clear that I could stand
against anything or anyone however wise and good? And I asked for a
sign, a Gideon's fleece, a round sum of one hundred rupees, no more, no
less.

It came; the sender wrote that she had sat down to write a broken sum,
but had been impelled to make it just that.

Awed and full of a most solemn joy, I called Ponnamal (who had returned
with the child) and Sellamutthu, the members of our Women's Itinerating
Band with whom I had fullest companionship of spirit. They too saw in
this nothing less than a Sign, and much comforted and enlightened, they
stood by me from that day forward.

But before the Sign came (the first of many such as will be shown
hereafter) fears had time to sweep up. They came in waves, wave upon
wave, and usually in the very early morning before it was light. 'It was
now dark' is surely a poignant word. Expense would lead to expense, and
difficulty to difficulty. This was the first time that the afterwards
oft-to-be-repeated question, 'What will you do with the children when
they grow up?' was asked, and it has been a help to remember who asked
it, the tempter, not the Lord. But the main and immediate question was
one of supplies.

Comfort came through the story of the feeding of the five thousand.
'When Jesus then lifted up His eyes and saw a great multitude come unto
Him, He saith unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread that these may
eat?'

'We' was the first word of reassurance here. *We*, not *you*. Then the
one hundred pennyworth of bread, something between six and seven pounds,
was just about the sum I had had to send for that child. The remote
became near as I thought of it. What are years to the King of Eternity?

But between verses 6 and 7 occurs, Westcott tells us, a break filled by
the day's work. Can I in this new work go on all day sure that in the
evening help will come?

Then as never again for fifteen years, I was allowed to taste of the cup
which would be poured out for me if it did not come. Allan Gardiner for
some hidden good purpose was allowed to starve to death. Therefore such
an issue could not be regarded as impossible. The children…I need not
track in writing the end of that thought. But I did that day tread every
foot of it in imagination and came to this: Suppose the children die,
and we all (of course) die with them, and the Christian world cries
shame on the one responsible, what will it matter after all? The
children will be in heaven, and is that not better than the temple?

But it did seem more likely to be to His glory that the little ones
should live and be fed, just as the five thousand and their women and
children were fed. It would be much more like Him. Only, one never can
get past the '*But if not*' of the three and the, fiery furnace. And
once the thing is faced, it is faced for ever. The mind is at rest,
there is no looking back, and no care.
# 3. Simla, and the First Nursery

One day a telegram came from Simla. A member of the Imperial Legislative
Council wanted facts about Temple children in South India. These facts
had of course to be most carefully verified, if they were to be of any
use to the men who were trying to frame a Bill for the help of such
children. Frequently after that such requests reached us. It was
impossible for any Government official (and the higher placed the more
impossible) to discover or verify facts for himself. The moment such a
man walks down an Indian street every blind, metaphorically speaking, is
drawn, and no man ever sees behind those blinds.

To attempt to find out what it wanted to know, Government would have had
to employ agents so well paid as to be above the temptation to accept a
bribe, and, even so, the truth would most probably have eluded them for
various reasons which do not concern this story. From this on,
therefore, from time to time certain expenses had to be incurred which
could in the nature of things show no visible result; for though more
than one Bill was framed none became law. The powers against it proved
too strong. This is not the loss it sounds. Those who know India know
why. But the good men and true who did honestly try to better things
were worthy of any help we could give them, and never was a long costly
journey undertaken, never a quiet week's life in temple rest-house or
wayside open shelter, with the one inconspicuous object of listening and
watching accomplished, but special sums dropped as if from the skies to
meet these unexpected charges.

There was at that time an I.C.S. man in South India who, reading what we
had written about the facts as we knew them, was extremely indignant and
resolved to disprove them. But he found this impossible. And one of the
first gifts which reached us from outside the inner circle was from that
man, who has been our firm friend ever since. Such gifts helped to meet
these less missionary expenses; but in the accounts given in this book
they are all merged in one; for they all belonged to the one work which
our Father had given us to do.

Such activities, however, led to its becoming known in the underworld of
South India that we were trying to get these children, and people in
sympathy told us when they knew of such; this led soon to the need of
nurseries. The first of these has a tale of its own.

We had been given a sum of money to use for this purpose. It was enough
to build a room 24 by 12 feet. This was less than half as long a room as
there was space to build round a courtyard already in use. To the Indian
builder such a use of space is foolish. Why not go right round and
finish off with a walled-in verandah, Indian fashion? That would be
sensible. All this was duly explained to me, and I saw their point, and
told them I thought the Father of these little children would very
likely give them a larger room if we asked Him. So we did, kneeling down
there and then in the middle of the heaps of sun-dried bricks. 'It is
Thursday. Let the work stop till Monday,' we said, wishing to give time
to be shown exactly how we should build. Monday was our mail day, and
guidance about such things often came on mail days through the gifts
which reached us then.

But on Saturday a letter came with notes for two hundred rupees, marked
clearly 'For a new Nursery.' It had been posted in Madras in the evening
of the day we had prayed for a gift to go on with. The Hindu masons
looked at those notes as if they had dropped from heaven, as assuredly
they had. Before we required more, another one hundred came in the same
way. And again fifty. By that time the work was finished. We needed no
more, and no more came. These gifts were anonymous. Some time afterwards
the giver became known to me. She told me she had not known anything of
our building operations, but one day in the beginning of that same week
she had felt impelled to write to her bank in Madras, and direct them to
send that sum of money and mark it in that way. As she was two days from
Madras, her letter reached them just in time to enable them to post on
the Thursday of our prayer.

'Christ Jesus our Lord: in whom we have…access with confidence.' Are any
words in the New Testament more willing to be put to proof?
# 4. Rose–Spray and Rain

From the beginning of my missionary life there had been one at home
whose delight it was to supply, so far as in him lay, the munitions of
war, as he called them. The first little account book shows the writing,
familiar at that time to thousands, and to me now, reminiscent of all
that is most loving, most fatherly in love. But, as though to teach one
that for this new work, and on to the end, henceforth all one's
confidence, all one's hope was to be God and God alone, the last long
illness of this dear earthly friend, Robert Wilson of Broughton Grange,
Cumberland, had now set in, and soon after the beginning of the Temple
children's work his help ceased. This sudden ceasing in the book of
gifts is very marked. 'Believe ye that I am able to do this? I alone
without another?' They said unto Him, 'Yea, Lord.'

And now began that series of provisions and interpositions to which the
wondering soul can never become accustomed, as though it were a light
and little thing for the God of all the earth to take thought for us.
Never once in fifteen years has a bill been left unpaid. Never once has
man or woman been told when we were in need of help; but never once have
we lacked any good thing. Once, as if to show what could be done if it
were required, £25 came by telegram. Once in an hour of need, of which
not one on earth had heard the least whisper, some one emerged from the
clamouring crowd at the Tinnevelly Bridge railway station, slipped a
gift into my hand as I was about to get into the train, and was lost
again in the crowd. And a day or two afterwards a gift came from the one
who was then our District Court Judge. So from the first we learned that
God's ravens fly in quite unlikely places; telegraph offices, railway
stations and district courts are not the places where we should have
looked for them.

Dohnavur is very inaccessible. This is good, as it leaves us free for
the greater part of the year to work without interruption, and it is
much safer for the children. But it means, of course, that not much
comes by hand to us, and there has always to be money in the cash box
for sudden calls.

Twice during the early months we were left without any. There was some
in the bank four hundred miles away; but this could only be obtained by
cheque upon the mission office in Palamcottah, a day's journey distant.
There had been robberies on the road between, which is in part open
plain, and liable to robberies. So the usual messenger had not gone, and
no one could be found to go. The Government post however came and went
as usual. Into the middle of this hiatus dropped a letter and a
telegram. We had to send money by money order to a place eight hundred
miles away by return of post, if we wanted to save a child discovered
there. To delay meant almost certainly losing the child. The letter
telling us so had been followed by the telegram, and both arrived
together. The same post brought us exactly the sum required by money
order from Canada. We sent if off that same day and it was in time to
save the child.

These earlier experiences have been told elsewhere, [*Lotus Buds. The
Beginning of a Story. Ponnamal.*] we only gather them up now because
they belong inspirit to this special book, and touching on them lightly
we will pass on.

One then, which greatly helped our faith, was the coming of the sum
(£20) we needed to meet a rice bill which was larger than we were
prepared for. The money came just in time to pay it. The sack of rice
was poured out on the ground-I can see it now-and then it came.

Another help, of which I cannot think without seeing a rose-spray beaten
in a rainy wind, occurred in the Hills, where a little room, whose
window was set in climbing pink geranium and roses, was the place where
I learned afresh what wonderful things our God can do. I had asked for
the comfort of a certain sum of money to come in the mail. And it had
come. [It was £40. Those were early days, and we were learning the truth
of St. Augustine's 'Our daily furnace is the tongue of man'-woman, I
should have said, that day-I can hear still the airy 'Well, *I* thought
Indian babies could live on rice-water!' and here we were needing £40
for milk foods. But the story is told fully on p. 242 of the big first
edition of *Lotus Buds* (p. 240 in the smaller later editions), so I
need not repeat it.] Outside the sky was darkening for rain; I saw a
little long light rose-spray with opening buds tossed about and swung up
and down, and then bent as it seemed to breaking-point under the first
fierce onslaught of the wind. Then the rain fell. Rain in India falls in
sheets, or in straightly slanted lines like the strokes of a scourge.
Under each smiting the rose-spray bent till it almost touched the
ground, but between each it sprang up again with such a living quick
rebound that it was as though it were verily alive and exulting. And I
watched, fascinated by the power of the life in it, till a sudden burst
of sunshine scattered the clouds, ended the rain and set that happy
rose-spray all but singing aloud for the joy of its dewy buds and
fresh-washed glistening leaves.

A few days later we were down in the Plains, and there was the very
fierce beating of a storm of wind and rain, and while this storm was
upon us it chanced that we were concerned about a money order for Rs.
150, which had to be sent to Ponnamal who was in charge of the little
branch nursery at Neyyoor in South Travancore. She was as careful as it
was possible to be, and a very clever manager; but even so, things were
costing much more than we had expected. We had yet to learn by blessed
practice, though we knew it of course in theory, that expenses whether
counted in pence, or shillings, or pounds, or hundreds of pounds, are
all one to God. I hope we have never been careless about spending the
pence, or their equivalent annas, and we had tried to avoid the little
addition of the commission on the money order, but could not. So it
went.

One week later a money order reached us for Rs. 151.14.0. So the Neyyoor
bill was repaid even to the commission, and there was something over.

There is a verse in the New Testament which no Indian grain merchant or
buyer of grain ever requires to be explained to him. Seller sells, and
buyer buys, according to this rule, 'good measure, pressed down, and
shaken together, and running over.' This is the measure expected. If
what is called 'flat' measure is wanted, it is so stated, otherwise the
running over kind is taken for granted all round.

Our God gives like that, even to the odd minas over. There is no 'flat'
measure with Him.

But we had not nearly got to the end of the storm. The nursery work was
attacked by a gang of evil men, led by one who was known for miles round
as pre-eminent in wickedness. Those who were bringing children to us
were tried in various ways and became discouraged. Some who had been
keen lost interest; and yet we had to go on, and soon a little new
nursery was the need of the day: so we prayed for it.

I was in a bullock-cart travelling back from a distant place and using
the uninterrupted leisure to plan the room and to pray for it, when the
local postman passing, recognizing the cart and coming behind, thrust
aside the sack hanging over its open end and put into my hands a bundle
of letters, the mail he had been taking to the bungalow. I opened that
bundle with feelings of expectancy those living in this way will
understand. In it was a letter with a cheque bearing the name
*Arrowsmith*. This name stirred a memory. For long ago Mr. Edwin
Arrowsmith took a children's service in Harrogate, and to that service
the children of a certain school went. In the quiet at the end, a sense
of the great love of God came to a child kneeling there. It was the
single watered moment of an arid three years. The cheque was from a
member of that family, and the name unseen, unheard of for so many
years, woke thoughts like fountains. Something in the letter now read
made it clear that the gift was that for which I had been waiting, the
Sign gift for the new room. At once therefore, material up to its
measure was ordered. More came as more was needed, and the room was
built that nine years later was to be heaven's waiting-room to Ponnamal,
the room where she heard her music and through all her long pain was
comforted. But long before that, before the room was roofed, the
intended device of the evil one failed, and we were delivered from all
our fears.

Storm and rain and a rosebud spray. God's rose-sprays are safe in God's
rain.
# 5. Anathoth

When we came to Dohnavur, the house which had been empty for many years
stood in the midst of a small waste, over whose low mud walls the
animals of two villages strayed at their pleasure, and in which half the
neighbourhood seemed to camp as a matter of course. Gradually things
became more orderly; and, as the work began to grow and more space was
wanted, we added to it slice by slice as we were able.

Buying land in India is no trifle. Every minute section is possessed,
not by one man, but by his family, and the consent of each member of the
family, major and minor, has to be sought and bought. These small
transactions are not counted in the price of the land nor did we include
them in our accounts. They were as nothing in comparison with the
expenditure of time they demanded, the endless agreements and changes,
as some lost and objecting paternal uncle's second wife's brother's son
was retrieved, and had to be placated, the leisurely palavers, and the
various involved 'makings of friendship' necessary for even the simplest
negotiations. For this is old India, not modern, and we do not pay
people to carry our burdens, we carry them ourselves.

Finally, thirty deeds of sale of various sorts accomplished, the
required legal formalities completed, the minors' matters happily
settled, and the documents safe, we began to possess our good
possessions. But in all this buying we walked softly.

One evening-it was December 23, 1913-we went up to the tree that then
bordered our dominion, and considered the question of refusing or
accepting an offer that had just come from two sets of owners, who till
then had been unwilling to sell. And we prayed, standing under the tree,
for wisdom and guidance, and then (for we could not help fearing these
expenditures, and wanted to be very sure indeed) for a Sign by the mail,
due next day. The sum required as an advance to secure the land was Rs.
450.

That Christmas Eve mail brought Rs.500 from one whose name was till that
day unknown. All through that month gifts had been very small. This gift
stood out distinctly as apart from all others and, coming on that day so
close upon our prayer under the tree, carried a sense of conviction to
us which quieted our fears. 'Great cheer' was the entry in our note book
that day, and the Christmas festival over, on December 26, the first
advance payment for that land was given, Rs. 450. Thus we continued,
buying as we could, for ten years and five months. The first payment of
Rs. 50 was made on April 1, 1904, the last of Rs. 1,217.4.0 on September
8, 1914. And I never understood the story of the buying of the field at
Anathoth as I did at the moment I handed the last cheque to Little
Brother (a tall and otherwise huge landowner of that name) who, after
years of refusal, consented to sell it just before the war made such
buying feel most impossible. 'And Thou hast said unto me, O Lord God,
Buy thee the field for money.' For truly it had been little less than
that.

One day, long before there was the least need of it (before even in
dreams I had passed the limit of the new mud wall, thrown round what had
seemed a purchase sufficient to last for years, for ever indeed), as I
stood on the nearly completed last new nursery-verandah which commanded
a view of a fair field beyond, reaching in fact right up to a village on
the north, the word came as clearly as ever I had known it, 'Ask for
that piece of land.'

'But, Lord, we do not want it.' And again the word came, 'Ask.'

I had never asked for an unwanted thing and was puzzled. I recalled the
first time it had been shown that 1 John 5:14-15 was not a word to be
whittled away till it ended in practically nothing, but literally and
limitlessly true. Standing there on that unfinished verandah I traversed
the long road between that day and this, and could not recall one
instance when an undesired thing was asked. But there was no escape from
that strange urging as of another will than mine; so I asked for the
field, adding though, I remember, 'But have we not enough?'

This was the field whose purchase was completed during the trouble and
uncertainty of those early days of war.

For in the most direct way gifts had come that paid for it. One from
South Africa from an unknown friend; one from another who said, 'Write
no name in your Gift book, only write "His hand,"' and obeying I so
entered it, and now cannot remember the name. Do the angels keep a roll
of the names of the Lord's anonymous givers? There are many anonymous
angels, perhaps they have charge of that roll. Then came another large
gift from one who felt sure, though I did not then, that there were
plans for extension in His mind for us. And so I knew that this was the
word of the Lord. And I bought the field, subscribed the evidence, and
sealed it according to the customs of the land, and it became ours. And
Anathoth means *Answers*.

Was ever name more fitting? Answered are the questions about the need to
have it. It is all used. Answered too the wonder about the means to buy
it. All the money spent on it was special and apart. And answered the
question about why, so previously, I had been directed to ask. Close
upon that time people round us sank wells and began to cultivate. Our
being here, we were told, made them feel safe. Right round that field
these field-gardens rose, but never one encroached on it. Once wells are
sunk land becomes much more valuable. Had even one crossed the limit set
by that strangely commanded prayer others would have worked their way
in, paying for little plots of it almost as much as we paid for the
whole. Now our wall is bounded by these outer cultivations, green
fringes for the pleasant place that is our Anathoth.
# 6. Court Fees

There was a time when we had to fight battles in the Court, to save a
child from the power of a mother so wicked that after bearing with her
for years her village, not too particular where such things are
concerned, had burnt her house down and turned her out.

We lost our case however (in the District Court), and the Judge decreed
that we were to pay costs all round.

Three weeks before the bill was sent in, a man in London, manager of a
well-known business house, was wakened and caused to understand that he
was to send a cheque to us next day. He was also caused to pray for us
very earnestly, and having committed us, with full assurance that help
and comfort had reached us, he slept again.

Next morning when he went to the City he was reminded of that word that
had come to him in the night. 'My days were an awful rush and once in
the vortex it was almost impossible to stop. Immediately I got to my
room, before taking off my hat and top coat or even putting my umbrella
in the stand, I pressed the bell for the chief cashier and another for
my typist. They arrived almost together and I said, "Let me know what is
in hand for Dohnavur and bring the cheque book with you." While he was
gone I dictated the letter to you, which was something to the effect
that it had been laid on my heart to send a cheque for what was in hand,
and that I had been concerned and had been praying, and was now at rest.
Your reply which came in about six weeks told that the case had been
decided against you, and that you had to pay costs on both sides, and
that the cheque was the exact sum, to the rupee, to pay the bill of
costs.' I was not free then to tell the greater comfort of the hour-it
was that just as that man prayed, help came, the Courts of Heaven
reversed the order of the Courts of earth and the child was saved.

That battle story is an old tale now. The letter copied here came only
the other day, something had recalled it to the writer's mind and he
told me for the first time what I have now set down. A coincidence?
Perhaps so, but by whose ordering? Of what nature? And how very good to
experience. Would that all the Lord's people had such coincidences upon
every difficult day of life. Truly, as the mother of two whom we hope to
welcome soon writes in a recent letter, 'Is there anything more helpful
than just to find out what more He can do?'
# 7. Jacob's Ladder

There are many such in our records. There was seldom time to write them
down, but a cutting from a home magazine, with a date or two and a note,
makes yesterday as today, clean-edged in every little fine-carven
memory.

After some six years of search for and the gathering in of children, it
became clear that they must somehow be taught, and, nurseries being
unsuitable for school-rooms as a permanence, that meant a school-house
must be planned and begun as soon as possible.

We had not thought of anything large, but as we pondered the matter 'as
it were the appearance' of something large was shown. Our way where
buildings are concerned is to ask for a pattern. At that time we did not
think of any other way, hardly knew, indeed, there was another way, for
we are far out in the country here, and by sheer force of circumstances
do sometimes what must seem rather audacious things. Years after our
school was built a friend, in telling us of building tribulations, told
us the price paid for plans such as could be submitted to Government,
and it did seem very wonderful that this expense had been saved, for we
knew nothing whatever about building, and might so easily have made
mistakes. I can only gratefully believe that, the Perfect-in-Knowledge
directing, we were saved from such mistakes, and guided into wise ways
by His great kindness.

Now the perplexing thing in this case was that the pattern that seemed
to be shown was much too large for our requirements. We had enough
money, a special gift, for a building framed on a smaller pattern. Why
then the larger, costlier plan? But it was drawn, and considered, and on
January 17, 1910, the estimate was made. It far passed the limits of
that gift.

We were, puzzled, just as we had been about being caused to ask for the
unwanted land. We did not want more than was required. The children come
slowly. They are never saved in shoals. Should we ever have a number
large enough to use profitably such a building? Also, if our whole
thought in educating them is only that they may be winners of souls,
would not the least costly of buildings suffice? Why this so costly
pattern? Not that it was extravagant. It would not have passed
Government requirements. It was quite a simple building, though it
seemed a great adventure to us.

In India the custom is for mission schools to be under Government. Plans
are submitted, and if passed half the cost is borne by Government.
Sometimes when we read statements about costs (for example, 'for so Much
a year you can have a child') we wonder for a moment why no such sum,
with us at least, would honestly cover expenses, forgetting that such
items as buildings are not counted into that alluringly small sum. But
our Father never forgets, so it does not much matter that we do.

These thoughts, however, did not trouble us on that day, January 17,
1910, when the plan that was to supply the need of the then unimagined
future, lay before us sketched on a piece of paper in red lines and
blue. 'And look that thou make them after the pattern that was showed
thee on the mount,' was the only thought in mind. And I well remember
the questions which led at last to the definite request, 'Show me a
token for good that we may know what to do.'

There was much else to think of then, for the time was full of distress,
and the great toil of the Court case was just beginning. There was
little leisure therefore for thought about such things as buildings.
Flesh and spirit were spent out to the uttermost, and except when
something recalled that prayer of January 17, it fell out of mind. But
on the 20th of that same month, what we then and ever since have
regarded as a three-fold token for good was given.

The 20th was our mail day. In the *Life of Faith* we found a gift
unusually large, £31 11s. 6d. from ten givers. A money order for £5 came
from the father of one who had just offered to us, 'A thank-offering for
great joy.' And the C.I.M. book, *Faith and Facts*, was sent to us.

So rich a gift coming immediately upon our prayer, so loving a gift from
a father who was already giving so much ('Shall He not with Him also
freely give?' was a word opened then), so inspiring a gift as this book
which swung faith and expectation high, for God is not the God of China
only, He is the God of India too-these three tokens for good together
had a voice that could not be mistaken. I remember taking the paper down
to the place where our school was to be, and looking again at the
initials of the nine givers. (The name the tenth chose was 'the truth of
God.') And I flew across the sea to them in thought and asked God to
thank them.

We took it then as settled that the larger plan was of the Lord's
counsel and that therefore what was required for it would come. The
masons agreed to work on these somewhat novel lines. They were to go on
and build exactly as the money came, and to that limit only. Much
wondering, they began. What we had in hand was enough for the
foundations.

In February a letter came from a new friend. It was dated January 17,
the day we had waited upon our God about the pattern. It told of £100 on
its way to us. We took that letter to the masons and translated it. Who
that has had such a happy thing to do will ever forget the doing of it?
We had told these men that our God heard prayer. They knew all about the
prayer of January 17. Here was that very date on the letter. And we
looked to see them kneel before Him, convinced that in very truth He is
the God of gods. But we had to wait for that. Caste bound them hand and
foot. Not till he had wandered far from the Lover of souls did the chief
of that little group 'fall at His lotus feet' saying as he passed into
the life beyond, 'Not Siva now, not Siva and Jesus. It is Jesus the Lord
only.' We stood with the men awhile, and there under the clear sky among
the heaps of building stuff we worshipped. And turning, we would not
have been surprised had we seen Him under the trees, as we passed into
their cool shadow on our way back to the house.

And lo, Christ walking on the water,\
 Not of Gennesaret, but Thames.

Blessed be the truth in such words.

Steadily on from that time forth gifts, over and above supplies for
other needs, came to us for the building, for they were so marked that
we were free to use them as required. Not one of these special givers
knew anything of what we were doing. They were not in touch with us in
any way and the gifts (as indeed all ours are, for we count nothing as a
subscription) were among those delightful mercies whose pleasure is
doubled by the element of surprise. Do not little children love
surprises? And what are we after all but our Father's little children?

So the building was finished. In it is a large room which holds all our
present family; in it we celebrate our festivals and our joyous Sunday
worship, that half-hour's Adoration which colours all the week. And
among the words written up in it is this, chosen by the child for whom
the Court battle was fought and by God's grace won, 'I will bless the
Lord who has given me counsel.' Counsel in plan; as we have long ago
proved, our thought would have been all wrong. Counsel in prayer; for we
know not what we should pray for as we ought. 'His name shall be called
Wonderful, Counsellor…the everlasting Father.' 'Your Father knoweth what
things ye have need of before ye ask Him,' yes, and before we even know
them ourselves.

Those who possess a microscope know how, in examining into any minute
work of the Lord, detail opens into detail as a higher and higher power
is used. And so it seems to us it is with these accounts. For example
that first gift opens as we look into it. It came through the generous
comradeship of a member of the brave little Ceylon and Indian General
Mission, who in taking meetings for his own mission in Australia, spoke
of us. Then one whose life is given to the interests of a keen mission
there, was moved to send the sum which started what we look upon as our
training ground for evangelists. Could any gift be more fragrant, more
steeped in the spirit of the Master?

But time would fail to look into these matters. Perhaps the angels see
them spread like pictures before them, and looking, laugh for joy. Only
let us end by noting that single date, January 17, 1910. In India,
prayer for guidance and for the money needed to follow it. In England,
prayer for direction about the giving of a gift. Thus shines

The traffic of Jacob's ladder,\
 Pitched between Heaven and Charing Cross.

There is no ancient, no modern, where the things of the Lord are
concerned.
# 8. As We Have Heard, So Have We Seen

Do doors of sorrow and of loss always lead into wealthy places? He who
is known as Walker of Tinnevelly was taken from us in August 1912.

He had been a splendid friend. When first the children's work began he
was at home, and his letters were doubtful, for he had never been in
that which I have called the Underworld, and could not measure its need.
But when, upon his return, he set himself to discover the true state of
things, and knew them to be indeed a call, his attitude changed and he
stood by us and was shelter from the smile that somehow was harder to
bear than the scourge of the tongue. 'A faithful friend is a strong
defence, and he that hath found such a one hath found a treasure.' Never
were truer words.

Now he was suddenly taken from us. We had to learn to do without.

That month of August was full of trials of many kinds. A child died in
painful circumstances. Very little money came in. Difficulties arose
about a strip of land, just then purchased. Perplexing, wounding things
happened, one after the other, and the many enemies of the work who till
then had lain quiet, fearing our defender who was known as a strong
brave man, seemed to spring out of the ground, and they compassed us
about like bees.

One Sunday a registered letter came. It was a lawyer's letter dictated
by a man who, after years of disappearance from the district, had
unexpectedly reappeared; he claimed that a fraction of the soil we had
bought was his, and demanded it back.

His relatives had sold it to us, believing his absence had given them
the right to it, and we had never heard his name mentioned during the
prolonged negotiation for that particular strip. It lay close to the
bungalow, and was already being built upon, the nursery was half way up.
Now the letter demanded the pulling down of what was built,
'Immediately,' otherwise the owner would take the matter to Court.

The air of Courts is the breath of life to a certain section of the
Indian public. We had just been through two years of Court troubles
(culminating in an acute six months for whose fees our Father sent us
the cheque from London), and we had urgent reasons for not wanting to be
plunged into this distress again. There was not only the land, there was
the matter of the children's safety. One case leads to another. In work
like this many a risk has to be run if anything vital is to be done. We
earnestly prayed therefore to be delivered from any more going to Court.

Perhaps all this will seem small to the brave women of the present day;
but we are not brave, and we never had before been without the help of a
strong man's hand. India is not a chivalrous land. There were moments
when we felt very weak and very terribly alone. And the gift book that
month showed an unaccountable fall-Rs. 234 (£15 12s.) instead of about
Rs. 1,000 (£66), which was our average expenditure then. Another Court
case would fly off with rupees; for the formal Court fees were of course
the least part of the expense. Altogether it was a difficult time, and
personal sorrow in parting from our friend seemed the merest nothing in
comparison with new care for the children's sake, and the sense of the
loss his absence must mean to them.

'In your temptations run to the promises; they be our Lord's branches
hanging over the water that our Lord's silly half-drowned children may
take a grip of them.' 'I will in no wise fail thee, nor will I in any
wise forsake thee. The idea of *fail* is that of losing hold, so as to
withdraw the support rendered by the sustaining grasp: that of
*forsake*, of deserting or leaving alone in the field of contest, or in
a position of suffering.' Westcott's note on the promise opened it then,
and we entered into a new room of quietness in the midst of strife.

Weeks passed, and no more lawyers' letters came. We went on with the
building of the room to be called Faith. And from that day to this we
have never heard a single word of or from that threatener of our peace.

And the money? This is the statement of Gifts and Expenditure for the
year, given in pounds for the convenience of readers at home:

£ s. d.

Gifts 1,050 5 3 ½

Expenditure 787 16 8

'Baskets'\* 262 8 7 ½

\* See Chapter IX.

Among the vitalized words of that time we all remember this: '*As we
have heard, so have we seen*,' and indeed all the words of that Psalm of
deliverance, the forty-eighth, which was the Psalm we were reading
together on the Sunday when that letter came, threatening us with such
hosts of troubles. 'God blew upon them, and they were scattered.'
# 9. The Baskets

One day after an earlier time like that just described, when what was
almost anxiety was turned into comfort, I thought of dear younger ones
who had been given as fellow-workers, and the fear came, What if
suddenly this burden is laid upon them? None of them have had previous
experience in this particular way of the Lord, which prepares the soul
for its peculiar disciplines. What if quite suddenly they are left to
face a situation for which they are not responsible, before they have
had time to learn how to walk by faith? If we are fed as it were from
meal to meal, and something intercepts the coming of the next meal, and
they are alone?

Perhaps it was a faithless thought; but we have a tender Master. He did
not rebuke, but took me to the same chapter and the same story which had
spoken to my soul when first the work began.

'Philip answered Him, Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient
for them, that every one of them *may take a little*.

'…And Jesus took the loaves; and when He had given thanks, He
distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set
down; and likewise of the fishes, *as much as they would*.

'When they were filled, He said to His disciples,

Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.

'Therefore they gathered together and filled twelve baskets with the
fragments of the five barley loaves, *which remained over and above unto
them* that had eaten.'

And, as I believed, the promise was given to me then that there should
be baskets over and above our daily supplies, and that, just as those
men and women and their children were free to use the pieces of the
loaves over from that great meal, if they needed them before they
reached home, so we should be free to use ours, should need arise before
we too reached Home, we and our children.

It reads simply. It felt simple as it was shown to me and, entirely at
rest, I left the matter, sure that should my journey Home be shorter
than theirs, there would be no embarrassment, even for the little
interval which might have to elapse before the disciples scattered all
over the earth had time to realize that everything would go on as
before, if only they did their loving part and distributed that which
was given them for us, even as they had done with such kind hands over
and over again.

And here, to make this matter quite plain, I must go back still further.
When the work began our needs were very small, £212 cleared the first
year. We never had paid workers, each who joined us worked as child with
mother, a way that peculiarly appeals to the Indian mind and also, as we
afterwards discovered to our thankfulness, effectually excludes all who
would offer for any reason other than the constraining love of the Lord.
We did most earnestly want only such. Their needs were met from the
common fund. If they had anything of this world's goods, without my
knowing it they slipped it into the common stock. Thus there were no
charges such as easily might have been, and indeed no money could have
bought what was offered, and is offered, by this company of Indian
women, and the true comrade who is husband of one of them.

It had been taken for granted as something that did not need words to
explain it, that we should not ask man for help, but only God. We had
found it enough before. When, later on, other ways were pressed upon us
by some who in their kindness thought ours too unpractical, we could
only feel about them as David felt about the helmet and the coat of
mail, 'I cannot go with these; for I have not proved them.' This ground
of most simple dependence was the only ground we knew, and we could not
have moved off it except at His word.

Then, too, we did not want to touch any money except what He meant us to
use. The spending of money is a great responsibility. We did not wish to
incur that responsibility unless He so commanded. *Only so could we be
sure of His guidance, and be fortified against the peril of building up
what might show well on earth, but be of no value whatever to the
Kingdom of Heaven*. Also we did not want to divert anything from others.
For this and other reasons we had no supported children as such, we
offered no attractions, such as naturally incline the heart of the
kindly to give. We did honestly seek not to attract, but only to draw by
prayer to God those supplies He saw good to entrust to us.

But even so, year by year there was a little balance, the floating
balance which carries across from the old year to the new, and is
required of course till the new supplies come in. At the end of the
year, if we were able, we put the floating balance of the previous year
aside, and thought of it as Baskets, the baskets over and above, as the
story of the Great Meal puts it. Between January 1904 and January 1914,
the Baskets of fragments thus gathered expressed in rupees were Rs.
11,101.8.8 (£740 2s. 0¾d.).

'Whether is it easier to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee, or to say,
Arise and walk?' I can still remember the puzzle of this question. It
seemed so obvious that it was easier to say, 'Thy sins be forgiven
thee,' for no one could immediately see whether they were or not, but
the effect of the other word lay open at once. And yet our Lord
evidently expected a different reply.

And years after the true answer to the question was understood, the
childish thought returned in a new form. Spiritual blessings and
'answers to prayer' may possibly be imagined, at any rate it may be for
some time uncertain whether they really are or are only imagined to be.
But there is no room for imagination where the figures in an account
book are concerned. Nor do bank pass books encourage that faculty.
Flowery feelings don't count there. Either the prayed-for money is, or
it is not. There is no room for uncertainty.

But how eternally true the truth implicit in our Lord's quiet question.
These records touch only the edges of His ways.
# 10. The Twelve Nurseries and the Baskets

By 1913 we had very much felt our need of more nurseries. An epidemic of
whooping-cough, another of measles (worse here than smallpox), smallpox
twice, fever often, dysentery sometimes, had taught us the need of a
children's hospital and isolation room. We are surrounded by an
insanitary neighbourhood; there is no sanitation whatever in rural
India. However clean we might be inside, close round about us on three
sides was unabashed uncleanliness, we could not always be well. So we
began to ask for small nurseries, which would set the larger rooms
already built free for these purposes.

But we had to wait as we were not clear that we could go on, for
unexpected expenses on behalf of our dear Ponnamal, now stricken by
cancer, were upon us, and just at this time something occurred to test
to the bottom layer those thoughts and decisions which till now we had
held unquestioned. Two friends came to spend a day with us. They asked
us if we were in need of help.

I shall not soon forget the quick response to my quick question, 'May I
tell them, Lord?' The answer did not come back so much in words as in an
assurance that He knew, and that was enough. So they went away without
knowing anything.

Then full upon us blew a hot blast of temptation over this. How foolish
not to tell. It was not as though they had not asked. But peace
returned. He with whom alone we had to do, He knew, He understood.

A few months later the war burst upon the world.

Who does not remember that day of shock when the first headlines
appeared in the paper? Who, alone among the heathen in any land with not
a white man within a day's journey, does not remember the sense of
bewilderment as the people of the country, becoming by a thousand
devious means aware of trouble, pressed round asking for explanations?
To explain politics is a man's business; we were women alone. The people
in whose midst we are set immediately prophesied two things so far as we
were concerned: supplies coming, as they knew they came, from heaven
alone, would stop (they seemed to think heaven would have enough to look
after without this small corner of India as an extra), and they would
see our wall fall flat. They had already seen one fall as will be told
hereafter, and we were then slowly rebuilding, but this second falling
was to be more extensive. It would include the nurseries. In brief, it
meant the work, invisibly and supernaturally sustained thus far, could
not possibly survive this new condition of things. 'You have not "the
mission," what will you do?' some asked in real concern. 'We have God,'
we said, 'wars in the world make no difference to God.' But they looked
at us with faces all wrinkled and puckered. God is, doubtless is; every
Eastern admits that. But this way of counting on Him, was it safe? 'You
will see that it is safe,' we said.

One evening a large company of Muhammadans came to look at the
illustrated papers, and hear about the war. They were accurately
informed about some matters and much at sea about others, and we had a
splendid time with them. They, too, could not imagine how we were going
to carry on, and we could not help feeling we had a chance the very
angels would rejoice in, to show forth the loving-kindness and
faithfulness of the Lord.

At first very little money came. We read the figures and look back at
the months, and wonder at the power that kept us in peace.

We had, however, gifts for new nurseries. The first was the birthday
gift of the little first daughter of those two friends to whom no word
of the desires of our hearts had been spoken. 'You told us nothing,'
wrote her mother, 'but it has been laid upon us to send you this; so we
know you will take it from the Lord.' We did indeed. And guided, as we
believed, surely, we had promised the workmen to go on, so that they had
engaged themselves to us and thus lost other work. But though we had
this and soon other money for building, enough did not come in apart
from such gifts for the ordinary needs of the work. And yet we could not
feel it would be honouring to our God to go back on our word with the
workmen and seem to confirm the saying of the heathen, who watched to
see what was going to happen. 'Lead me in a plain path because of those
which observe me' is a word for such times. So we told the men we would
go on, and we watched for an increase in the gifts. This did not come.

In September, £57 1s. 11d.; in October, £32 18s.; in November, £57 10s.
5d.; in all, £147 10s. 4d. as compared with £566 12s. 5½d. in the three
previous months, was perplexing enough to cast us upon our God.

Then-will the reader wonder?-in all sorts of insidious ways, the thought
of those friends returned. Perhaps He had sent them before this happened
on purpose to smooth our way, and we had mistaken His kindness and
presumptuously refused it. That was one of the little lashing thoughts
of the time. But again and again comfort came and there was not the
sense of having grieved Him. So we took it that this was a needless
distress and ceased to look back on our guidance (always a vain folly),
and drew from the Baskets.

Rs. 4,143.9.8 (£276 4s. 9¾d.) we drew that year, a very large sum for
six months in proportion to the whole amount, but over twenty-two
thousand miles were covered that year in trains alone, and there were
many long slow bullock-cart journeys too, in search of children in
danger, and in connection with their deliverance. And over all that
region Gospels were scattered, and in some places at least a true
witness was borne, so that apart from the saving of children, something,
we trust, was done that will bear fruit in the end.

To me personally, it was not at first an easy thing to draw from the
Baskets, for I had thought of them as provision for what might be for a
little while a difficult time when I was not here to help. I had wanted
to make it easier. But what foolishness it was, as if the only One who
mattered would be away too. And so this fear very soon lost its power
and we went on happy and care-free. How could there be fear or care once
it was made plain to us that what we were doing was not foolhardiness,
but just faith in the word of the Lord?

And yet I well remember how careful we had to be about such matters as
reading and talk. (Not that there is not always need of care if the
Spirit is to be ungrieved, but that this need was emphasized for us
then.) For a book or a newspaper article written from the world's point
of view, or talk along these lines, had a curiously troubling effect,
and so had 'religious' reading of the nerveless sort, common enough
everywhere. It was as if such had nothing in it for the nourishment of
the kind of faith required for this particular way of the Lord. But to
read strength was to be strengthened. Science, that makes God's thoughts
visible to men, all forms of noble biography and poetry, converse with
those who do business in great waters and see, and expect to see, the
works of the Lord and His wonders in the deep, above all, to breathe the
atmosphere of the Book of books itself, was life and joy and confidence.
Fed thus, the fibres of faith were nourished with food convenient.

So we went on, keeping our contracts, using the money sent for nurseries
for that purpose only, and with the other gifts continued our search for
children in danger, and supplied the needs of the work, supplementing
them once and again from the Baskets provided beforehand. Living upon
our balance is doubtless the accountant's way of putting it, but we
prefer our way, which after all is quite as true as his. And no one,
workman or child, had ever the shadow of a cause to feel forgotten of
the Father.

Once a crowd of people came round the one who was buying milk.

'We hear there is not enough money coming to buy food.' (A good deal of
what comes is known to the village as it passes through the village
post-office, so they knew there was very little.)

'Of that I have heard nothing,' was the Indian woman's answer, 'only I
know all the milk that is required is still being bought and paid for,
as you yourselves are witnesses. And I have not heard of any child being
unfed.'

So the people went away saying, 'Their God feeds them.' Later they came
again, and this time with fresh stories of what was going to happen in
Europe. It was the time of the submarine trouble, and the bazaars were
full of whispers. Two mails had been lost and more might be. 'And what
will you do then?' We told them in plain words that we believed if need
arose the crows would fly to us with food or the ground would be white
with rice-cakes in the morning. 'When the mail stops coming, come in and
see it,' we told them. And they wondered and went away.

When the war ended not a workman or a coolie had been kept waiting a day
for his pay, not a child had ever hungered, all twelve nurseries which
had been our dream in 1913 were built and filled, a wall nearly a mile
long was built, the Forest place was found and bought, and a house was
built up there. And we still had in the Baskets, as a later page will
show, Rs. 2,164.3.0 or £144 5s. 7d.

Thus, to revert to an older story, we poured from our pot of oil, and as
we poured, more came to pour, according to the custom of the Lord.
# 11. The Letter Written by the Fireside

In a searching and illuminating note on St. John 15:7-8, Westcott says
that the prayer there considered is only some transformed fragment of
our Lord's teaching, and he speaks of the coincidence of the will of the
one who prays with the will of his Master, and shows how the result of
such prayer ('It shall be done,' more literally, 'It shall come to pass
for you') is not due to any external or arbitrary power but to the
action of a law of life. And upon the word 'Herein' he says, 'The end
which God regards in answering prayer is that we may bear much fruit.'

In telling of, prayer and of answer in India, it is more and more borne
upon one that this is only half the story. The other part will be told
by and by, when the wonderful intertwined 'all things' of our Father's
providence are opened to us, and we see, as words could not show, how
they worked together for good, the listening ear thousands of miles away
and the obedient loving heart responding to indications of that will
which it is life to recognize and serve. But sometimes, just as if to
give us a foretaste of the happiness awaiting us at the end of the day,
little glimpses are given into the working of the law that lies behind
answered prayer.

In January 1915 enough came to us to cover all expenses connected with
the salvation of children.

In February very little came. We had to draw again from the Baskets.
This was never a light thing with us, though, as I have said, we were
kept from care about it. The cares of the year were enough for the year.
In the early months two of our best workers failed and had to be sent to
the sanatorium, where one of them remained for over a year; later a
third had to go. These girls had been brought up in unhealthy
surroundings and were tubercular. They had been called to us in unusual
ways, and were specially precious because of their entire devotion to
the work. Costly journeys and various other expenses were now added to
the already large amount required to keep all running smoothly. Above
all, speaking spiritually, it was our hardest, saddest year. Never,
except in 1919 when once more that grief of all griefs, spiritual defeat
in the battle for a soul, had to be endured, had such sadness of anxiety
been appointed. And the Lord who knows what care about money can be at
such times, did not in this first experience of that grief allow it to
approach us.

On February 24, He drew near to one who sat by the fire in a little
house in England. It was 'well past bed-time, after a long and busy
evening' and He caused it (I quote her words) 'suddenly to occur to me'
to write. So she wrote:

'We have been doing up our accounts for our publishing business and find
a nice profit which we want to give away at once. We are going to send
you £150 of this money, possibly you may need it for running expenses
since the war will have made a difference to you.' Thus for that month
we were happily defended from that last trial, and set free to fight our
Lord's battles without distraction, so far as the expenses of the battle
were concerned. And where other troubles not so lightened were
concerned, these words, written four hundred years ago, came to us as if
fresh washed with the tears of yesterday: 'I welcome this furnace,
Christ's wisdom made choice of it for me, and it must be best because it
was His choice. It is my aim and hearty desire that my furnace which is
of the Lord's kindling may sparkle fire upon standers-by to the warming
of their hearts of His love. Why should I start at the plough of my
Lord, that maketh deep furrows on my soul? I know that He is no idle
husbandman. He purposeth a crop.'

But this little book is not meant to deal with such experiences, but
rather with the single and separate fact of the coming of provision in
answer to prayer. That year closed with what looked to us as little
short of a miracle, like the multiplying of the loaves again. We were
able to return to the Baskets all we had taken out in the previous year,
and add Rs. 1,977.12.0 or £131 17s. So that we took out £276 4s. 9¾d.
and put back £408 1s. 9¾d.

'He saith unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread that these may eat?

'And this He said to prove him; for He Himself knew what He would do.'

How often during the three years yet to come we recalled those words. He
to whom the War was known before ever it began, He who marked the path
of the submarine in the great waters, knew what would reach us and what
would fail, and when it failed, knew Himself what He would do. The
Baskets were never once emptied. As the writer of that fireside letter
wrote five years later, when the trial of our faith was much sharper,
'Real faith believes not only that God *can*, but that He *will*.' Yes
*will*, if only we are sure that there is coincidence of the will of the
one who prays with the blessed will of his Master, and that the only end
regarded with us, as with our God, is the bearing of much fruit. But who
could write such words without turning them into prayer? 'Try me, O God,
and seek the ground of my heart: prove me and examine my thoughts. Look
well if there be any way of wickedness in me: and lead me in the way
everlasting.'
# 12. The Wall

But the building of the twelve nurseries, the care of the children
already saved, the search for and the saving of others, the teaching of
enquirers and their preparation for baptism, the caring for Indian
guests, and what little medical work there was strength for, besides the
evangelistic work which is very part of life-the provision required for
all this did not exhaust the goodness of the Lord to us during those
years of war. Nor did the gift of the Forest and Forest House to be told
of later. There was that large need (the wall) and its supply. And as
more than any other it impressed the Hindus round about us, we tell it
now.

On the night of December 16, 1913, after solid sheets of rain, the deep
rumble of crashing masonry awoke us, and the eight foot high wall with
its weather-proof coping half a foot higher was flat. It was the story
of Jericho, only unhappily reversed, and we gazed in consternation at
the immense length of sloppy rubbish, every foot of which would have to
be scooped up and carried off by a battalion of coolies. And that wall
was built of sun-dried bricks and had cost what felt to us like a
fortune, Rs. 3,080 or about £205, money which had come as all the other
had come in direct answer to prayer, and so had been rejoiced over
equally in its coming and in its spending.

The wall was a necessity. More than once suspicious people had been
found in the compound at night. For our business is not with the
unwanted children. The whole point and force of the work is that it
touches those who are very much wanted. 'I will give you three hundred
rupees for her,' said a Temple woman to a worker of ours who was
bringing a tiny child to us by train. 'See, I will pay it down this
moment.' Notes to the value of a thousand rupees have been offered for
another. 'Pile the gold on the floor to her chin, but I will not give
you the child,' had been said to me by a famous Temple woman living
within six miles of Dohnavur about a little girl we had tried to save.
(Not that I had suggested piling gold on the floor, but the word shows
the fact). Yes, that wall was a need and so had been supplied, and there
it lay, within six weeks of its completion, a mass of miserable rubble.

'Let not your heart be troubled. Ye believe in God, believe also in Me.
Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing I And one of them shall not
fall to the ground without your Father.' How soothing is the cadence of
familiar words. Would not our Father who regarded the falling of a bird
regard the falling of the wall? Then, like the clear notes of a song:
'The Lord is able to give you much more than this.' *This* meant just
then that tangible thing, a wall of sun-dried bricks that had cost £205.

Then we counted our mercies. The floods of that night had demolished
bridges and swept many a costlier fabric than our wall like straws upon
its stream. Many lives had been lost that night. Not one of our little
ones had perished.

One night while the wall was still flat, a tiger, finding the forest too
hopelessly wet, strayed down and marched in upon us. Our children were
asleep on their verandahs. The cows upon whose milk the lives of the
babies depended were in open sheds. The tiger walked past them all,
repassed them, not touching anything, and went out as he had come in. We
traced his spoor with feelings of mingled excitement and awe. He was
shot next day, and we could not help being relieved, though we could not
possibly be glad.

But tigers from the forest were as nothing to the greater perils our
unprotected state invited. And yet we knew we were not unprotected.
There was the wall of fire.

All through the remaining days of December we watched, wondering what
our God would do. A family like ours with its many requirements easily
convertible into cash, to lie on the open waste, undefended and
undefendable (so far as the sight of man went) was a tempting thing, too
tempting our Robber clan people felt. We pay a kind of blackmail to them
according to the custom of the country, and they engage to protect us to
the best of their ability. At any rate they see to it that none of their
clan molest us. But they were not happy about us, and after a few
patient weeks said so. We told them about the wall of fire, but they
wanted something they could see. There were, as I said, far more serious
anxieties than mere properties to be cared for. Apart from the matter of
the very little children, India is not the safest place in the world for
girls living, not in a shut-up institution, but in cottages too small to
allow of sleeping indoors in heat. Meanwhile the heaps of mud bricks,
now a mass of mud, blocked the outlets of the compound, and had to be
dug through to let the water out. And the Hindus looked on. On January
22, 1915, the first large gift for a new wall came, £125. £40 of this
was marked for it, and all was to be used if required. It was indeed
required and we used it all.

In April, on the 28th, came the next ear-marked gift, Rs. 750 or £50,
and from that time on the money came steadily, ear-marked 'for the new
wall.' It was most wonderful to watch it coming, the gifts for the
nurseries never mixed with it, each gift was marked by the giver, so
that we had no doubt but went steadily on, till He who had said 'much
more than this' (the mud-brick wall) did as He had said, and a wall, not
of sun-dried brick but of burnt brick on stone foundations, was
finished.

It had its difficulties. Misled by a too confiding recommendation, we
found ourselves in the hands of an unscrupulous mason who changed his
prices whenever a new advance had to be given. Our part of India insists
on the pernicious habit of advances (unless one is able to pay a
contractor to take all off one's shoulders), so this came to mean that
we soon were in his power. He could threaten to stop the work at any
moment, and did.

We tried to get at his conscience, but he did not appear to have any. He
knew our only way was an appeal to the Courts, and this, as of course he
also knew, was the last thing we wanted to do. So he played his cards
accordingly. Then came a new loving-kindness of the Lord. As we waited
upon Him for help, a strong good man from the Public Works Department
called upon one of us who was a friend of his. We said nothing of our
distress but, noticing the wall in building, he offered to have a look
at it. He looked and then, 'Can I help you in any way?' was the question
that ended our troubles. He sent his sub-engineer to pay flying visits
and overawe the builder. We were kept out of the Courts, delivered from
our fears, and enabled to get the wall completed in peace. It took
nineteen months to build, and cost £480. It is not a vain thing to trust
the Lord.

But even this does not complete the story of the wall. The P.W.D. man,
sent to our help by our English friend, was a Hindu, and we had many
talks about the things of God. At the end of the work, when we wanted to
pay him for his trouble, he refused to touch an anna, 'No, I do not want
it; only pray to your God for me.' He became and continues to be our
steadfast friend, always ready to help us if he can, though he knows
that the one prayer of our hearts concerning him, towards which all our
intercourse with him is bent, is that he may become a living stone in
the spiritual house.

The soul of the East is never wholly submerged in mud. One day lately, a
man whose life is given to the material was discussing these matters
with us-the visible answers to prayer with which this place abounds. We
were standing outside the children's part of the compound at the time,
and I had been telling him of a new hope we have for reaching further
afield, and showing more clearly than has yet been possible how loving
the Lord is.

'It will cost much money,' he said slowly, 'but that does not make any
difference to you. We shall see you do it.'

'But why?' I asked, surprised at his way of looking at things, and
wondering for a moment if he thought we were sailing on seas of gold (we
very much are not). 'Why would it not make any difference to us?'

And this world-absorbed man answered, 'Is it not known in all the
country round that your God hears prayer?' And he pointed to the walls,
built as it were of prayer-wrought bricks, and continued almost in the
words of the psalm, 'Among the gods there is not one like unto God, the
Doer, there is not one that can do as He does.'
# 13. Weeding, and the Major's Cheque

'God has so arranged the chronometry of our spirits that there shall be
thousands of silent moments between the striking hours'; so said a
thoughtful woman of that thoughtful generation that has lately passed.
In looking over records of any period of time, one is apt to pass the
silent minutes and tell of the striking hours. It must be so, perhaps,
but for truth's sake let the minutes be remembered. Life is not always
ringing its peal of bells.

There were, towards the close of 1912, and all through 1913, thousands
of minutes that came to be lived through under the steady pressure of
difficulties that seemed as if they would never yield. Mabel Wade, our
one trained nurse, my most dear friend, was on furlough. (When news came
of her expected return we were at the sea with the children, and the
colours of the sea sang for joy with us that day.) It was the time of
distress, and the up and down of hopes and fears about Ponnamal; and
then a deadly fever broke out in a town three miles away and spread like
wildfire, flickering across empty spaces as if it fed on air, and
finally reaching us.

It was a burning fever, temperatures of 106° were common, and dozens of
the children were down at once. By the end of 1914 we were clear and it
died down, to revive again and perplex our plans for the children's
education. Finally, it departed, and, much relieved, the school pulled
itself together again and got to work.

But then came the War, and interruptions caused by the children being
needed to help in various ways and save coolie, and one of these
interruptions led to such a happy and good hour that it cannot be
omitted in this book of finance.

Part of the land called Anathoth had been fenced off for crops; and rape
seed, from which oil is expressed, was to be sown. But the field had
first to be weeded. The children had been so often interrupted, and
their lessons therefore were in such serious arrears, that we did not
want to call them off again; but, as all the fields round about needed
weeders, double pay was asked by coolies, and very little money was
coming in at the time, so we had no coolies. Instead, the children were
called.

They departed gaily, each blithe little maid in her oldest blue rags.
(Blue in those days kept blue to the very raggiest rags.) They were
delighted, of course, to help, delighted too, like children all over the
world, with any kind of change, and they sang rollicky songs about being
jolly little coolie girls who were going to do five times as much as any
village coolie (a promise faithfully kept), and set off for the field.

But the sun was very hot, and bending over the furrows very tiring, and
after the second day they were sorely tempted to slacken. There was a
*tamasha* going on in the village too, they could hear alluring noises
in the distance, and they badly wanted to stop. But if the field could
not be weeded it could not be sown, and the season would be lost; so
they went on bravely. On the morning of the third day, after seeing them
start, and watching for a while the little blue groups dotted about on
the terra-cotta coloured earth in the clear morning light (did it look
as pretty and as lovable a picture to the angels as to us?), we went
away alone and asked that something large, a kind token for good, might
come soon for their encouragement.

It was then November 5. The many lovers of these children had not
forgotten them, and all the little gifts that came week by week were
more to us than could be told in terms of this earth's values. Each was
a bright particular cheer. But with the exception of one gift for the
wall, all had been small since August, when on the 18th we were carried
over that month's needs by £95 14s. from those faithful nameless givers
of years, the readers of *The Christian*.

In war-time mails were irregular. One dropped upon us that morning. It
brought us ten shillings-and news of £50 on its way to us.

Straight back to the field I went rejoicing. A call brought the children
skurrying to the shade of a cactus hedge, where I stood and read them
the story of it.

A new friend under the name Tranquillitie, so suitable to the moment,
had sent it. Her brother had given his life in the War; and this was his
money. He loved children, and his sister thought he would like the
children here to have a share in it.

Tamil is a language which lends itself to joy-words. There is a phrase
which sets forth ear-joy, eye-joy, heart-joy. Nothing less was enough
that day. Heartened and happy the children went back to their furrows.

After this we went home and sang a song of thanksgiving and praised the
Lord in heaven: because it is good, because His mercy endureth for ever.
# 14. In Currency Notes

I have told in an earlier chapter how sometimes, just in the hour of
need, the post brought us ready money to pay for something at that
moment required. Twice during this period there were similar times of
pressure, when it had been impossible to get money in time to meet
certain payments, and we, sorely distressed by the sorrows of Ponnamal's
illness and some private troubles of our own, had hardly leisure of mind
to give to accounts. We turned to the Lord and told Him so, and asked
Him to send money in cash instead of by cheque, to carry us over the
difficulty.

Of course it should never have occurred. There were the Baskets to draw
from. But they were out of reach for the moment, and as I have told, I
had not been watching the cash box. But do not such matters make as it
were a platform for His kindness? Not extreme to mark what is done
amiss, looking down on us His poor children with such wonderfully kind
eyes, that is our Father. He knew we were tired and dazed with pain, the
sore pain of watching pain, for Ponnamal was dying then, and He let us
pray that prayer and write down even the hour of it. It was 5:30 a.m. of
a day that was going to be (save for the comforts of love) a whole
little cupful of grief.

At 8 a.m. that same morning a large blue bank, envelope registered and
insured was handed to me. I opened it wonderingly. It contained three
thousand rupees and-last detail of thoughtfulness-in small notes,
exactly what was required for our payments (large notes being difficult
to negotiate in this little country place). Such a sum, £200, had never
before reached us in notes. Gifts touching hundreds were always sent by
draft direct to the Bank of Madras, or by cheque to us.

Once again, and this time all the way from Russia, a gift in currency
notes was paid into our hands; the giver, one of the Lord's hidden ones
now, wrote that it seemed to her all Governments were doing the bidding
of the Prince of this present world. We knew she had an intimate
knowledge of what she was writing about, but little dreamed how swiftly
in her own poor country those words would be fearfully verified. We
never knew if she received our letter of thanks, never knew till just
lately whether she had lived or had been swept in that whirlwind of
destruction safe out of reach of storms; and often we marvelled at the
ways of the Lord, who can out of the very edge of such mighty events
command help for this very little place in so far a corner of the earth.

Almost immediately afterwards another law-suit threatened us. To make
all safe for the child concerned, ready money was required, and required
without warning. There was no time to send to get it, nor was there
need, for it came.

Again and again in what seems to us a truly wonderful way, the
particular need of the hour has been supplied by gifts coming to us in
notes. It was so during those very difficult years when cheques seemed
to melt in our hands. It is so even now. For at the time of writing,
month by month, a registered envelope falls, like a benediction made
visible, on our breakfast table, just as the month is beginning and many
petty payments have to be made in cash; and the sight of it carries us
back to a very hard time when one in Government Service, whom we soon
knew to be God's knight, came to camp with us.

We had never intended it, of course; but he asked a question to which
the only answer could be a glance at our books. I can hear now the quick
drawn breath over a certain month, and see the look of human kindness
and gladness over the next, which showed how very safe it is to trust
the Lord.

There are many claims upon such men in India. A family at home, the
demands of life out here. If we had thought he would want to help us I
think we should have parried his questions, we should certainly never
have shown him that book. But when his letter came saying that month by
month this gift would be sent to us, he so put matters that we could not
refuse. It was understood that it must not be thought of as a promise.
We made that clear (for it might not be right to go on), and with this
proviso what could we say but our one word *Inasmuch*?

So as the new month comes, with the little new bundle of notes in its
hand, we take them and are thankful.
# 15. Limelight and Another Illumination

From a P.S.A. notice:

'Subject. A renewed world-No sorrow. No pain. No death. No
collection.'-*Local paper*.

And Punch's comment is, 'The last item sounds almost too good to be
true.'

'I am not sure that you are right about limelight.' (And the benefits of
large ways of advertisement were emphasized.) 'Faith is essential, but
faith sitting still and waiting for miracles, if not negative, is at
least intransitive. Faith without works is dead.'

This, from a barrister in India, concluded with, 'You may not remember
that I had a very full knowledge of the procedure adopted with these
Temple children. I had a case in which the dedication was disputed from
a very different point of view' (than ours, he meant), 'namely heirship,
and I think we got the whole truth though possibly not nothing but the
truth.' Then the writer enclosed a gift for the work, thus cancelling
most delightfully his previous argument. For did he need the limelight
to move him to pity and to help?

Punch on 'No collection,' and our legal friend on the limelight, are
first in a bunch of letters from which I quote some paragraphs never
written for print.

'I have felt very much impressed with the need of your special work and
longed to help; but as my husband is only a working man I could only
give you my prayers, and leave the issue with God.

'But now I have just received a very unexpected legacy due to me two
years ago, and I hasten to send the amount by a post-office order for
ten pounds in the Lord's name towards the nurseries.'

The writer lives in one of our colonies. The address she gave was
insufficient to trace her, and for a long time she was unthanked. Could
anything have been more chilling to such a giver? But unchilled she
wrote again, and this time her gift was £50. And she is the wife of a
carpenter, not wealthy. We put her letters next that one about the
limelight, and blessed God for these proofs that earth's limelight is
not needed, for we do not know how to manipulate those little startling
jets. Better surely, ten thousand times better, the quiet light that
flows from love. The love of the Lord passes all things for
illumination.

Yet again came a letter worded in that strangely suggestive way. 'I am
impelled to send you a cheque for £100 which goes by this mail to the
Bank of Madras. What a joy to know that God is watching your need and
seeing beforehand that it is sent in time from His treasury.' And again,
from another in the same year: 'I have made out another cheque for you;
I have been impelled to do it. I had been considering it for some days
and felt it was more than I could afford; but somehow today something
said to me, "Go and do it," and I have asked the Lord to accept and
bless it. How lovely it would be to hear that it just lifts you over
some great difficulty.'

In truth it did. For it came at a time when the rupee was at its worst;
a pound from England then meant only six rupees fourteen annas, or less
than ten shillings, and its purchasing power was three shillings and
eight pence. But the Lord sent this gift to us in rupees, five hundred
rupees, which meant that nothing was lost.

But it was not only the coming of these larger gifts that touched us to
the heart: 'Yesterday I went to see a friend who has rheumatoid
arthritis. I remember her when I was about five years old and she was
unable to walk then. Now she is almost blind. She often has to have some
arrangement to hold up her eyelids. She cannot lift her hands at all.'

'She said: "F., I have two bits of gold I want to give for the work.
I've held on to them for a long time, and last night I was thinking of
it, and I felt I ought not to hold on to them any more. I haven't any
more, dear. My sister gave me one and my brother another."

Then I had to raise the rugs and take her purse from her pocket and take
the two half-sovereigns out myself. I could hardly bear to do it. I saw
how very precious they were to her. Yet it is to God she is giving them,
and even I have found what riches He gives for little self-sacrifices.
But they are a precious two half-sovereigns.'

'And He looked up and saw…a certain poor widow casting in thither two
mites.' Two mites, two half-sovereigns. He looked and saw them.

No, it was not alone the gifts of those who could give in hundreds that
came as direct and blessed reliefs, and still come. The gifts if counted
separately would total many thousands, they do not average large sums.
And the very smallest of all is one whose dear little cheer comes
oftenest:

'Betty (aged nine) fished in her pocket and with her face all working
brought me two bright pennies for you. I promised I would send them, and
they go to you wrapped with love.'

There have been days when Fear and Faith like two live persons stood on
either side of us, and then little Betty came with her two bright
pennies, and Fear fled.
# 16. ‘The Unfolding of thy Words Giveth Light’

During the year and a half after the war things became more and more
difficult; for exchange got worse and worse and the price of rice
(because of drought), and therefore of all food-stuffs, rose. High
prices for rice mean high prices for fodder for animals (as they eat
rice-straw), and of course all coolie and therefore building, everything
in short which means labour, rises with rice. And yet we were pledged to
go on with the boys' work, begun in the last year of the war and
confirmed to be our Lord's will for us by the signs following.

These our signs may cause questions in some minds. But our Lord has many
ways of guiding His children, and this is the way, as we believe, He has
chosen for us. Perhaps if we used the word 'indications of His will'
instead of the more direct *signs* it might be less open to
misunderstanding; but we use the word as it came to us first, so simple
that a child can understand it, and yet so full of mystery that it
baffles the wisest to explain. Delitzsch, in speaking of Isaiah's offer
to Ahaz of any kind of miracle in the upper or the lower world ('Descend
down deep in thy asking to Hades or ascend up to the height'), says that
this cannot but perplex the adherents of the modern view of the world,
and they think the prophet is playing a dangerous game and that, if Ahaz
had closed with the offer, Jehovah would certainly have left him in the
lurch; but, Delitzsch quietly notes, Ahaz had no such thought; he hid
himself under the screen of a mock humility, but he never doubted the
offer, charged deep with the mysterious, the miraculous, as it was.

But our concern is not to explain, still less to defend, it is only to
bear witness. We knew (who does not?) that strong personal desire may be
mistaken for the Lord's direction. We did not want to make mistakes and
grieve His Spirit by running before Him. And as regards all our doings
we wanted to run between guiding lines, and what guiding lines could be
more clearly discerned than just this same coming or withholding of
supplies? So, when the inward urging was insistent, and the word of the
Lord, so far as we knew it, was with us, and yet special difficulties
barred the way, we did humbly wait upon our, Lord and Master for some
unmistakable token which no imagination could create, something outside
ourselves. Sometimes the response to that prayer came in the old
familiar, 'Ask, and thou shalt receive.' 'Descend deep in thy asking or
ascend to the height.' Sometimes the choice was not left to us, but
something, recognized the moment it appeared, was granted to us. In
other words, sometimes the waters of Jordan were divided or ever we had
to cross them, and sometimes our feet were dipped in the brim of the
water before the way through was opened for us. The sign came, not
before obedience as guide, but after it as confirmation. And this is of
course a much more searching lesson in faith than the other.

We had for many years greatly longed to start work for little boys, for
there are numbers in South India who are exposed to dangers as acute as
those that attack the little girls. If I had been alone in 1914, I
should almost certainly have gone on and crossed that river then; but I
did not feel free in spirit to do so till we were all of one mind in an
house, and the great difficulty present in some minds was the absence of
medical help. Even English baby boys are known to be harder to bring up
than baby girls, and Indian babies are very much more fragile than
English. In September, 1917, faith was given for the first time to all,
to be willing for anything, even for doctorless work (and only those who
have clone such work know what it entails). On the eighth of that month
a medical student, one of whom we had never heard, was called, and
offered in England. We heard of her offer in October, and wondered at
the ways of the Lord. While these words are being written she is landing
in India, gift straight from His hand through the hands of His lovers
and ours.

The first boy came on January 14, 1918. Then to the adversary was given
power. A new compound must be begun, in other words a new work. Indeed,
it had begun. To what would it lead? Words, met long ago and pasted
because of the serious warning in them into my cash box, flashed into
mind:

Thou hast enough to pay thy fate?\
 Well, be it so;\
 But thou shouldest know does thy God send thee there,\
 Is that it all? To pay thy fare?\
 There's many a coin flung lightly down\
 Brings back a load of care.\
 It may cost what thou knowest not\
 To bring thee home from there.

What would be the end of this new journey into the unknown? What would
be needed of courage, patience, hope, faith that no disappointment can
daunt, love that no heartbreak can kill. 'It may cost what thou knowest
not to bring thee home from there.'

And for the immediate present, here was a new compound to embark upon, a
new large nursery should be begun at once. The strong in faith will
wonder; but I asked my God for a sign. The doctor had been prayed for
(so far as I was concerned) for fourteen long years. Her call then, even
though occurring in that exact month, could hardly be regarded for
certain as a sign, though surely it was nothing less. It might be called
by that convenient name, coincidence. So I wanted something more
absolutely unmistakable, to assure and reassure us that the Presence
would go with us and, whatever the storms by the way might be, give us
rest.

Then it was as if the Lord in His infinite tenderness came near to the
one who feared and said, 'Ask.' And I asked for one hundred pounds to
begin the new compound, to be given by the mail due next day. Then I
told my household.

The mail came. Who that has opened a mail under such circumstances but
will understand how each letter was handled, how every eye watched the
opening? A money order for forty-two rupees, six annas, another for
three rupees. And that was all.

But, though I cannot explain it, I know there was no sense of
disappointment. One of the younger workers who had been away when the
last few letters were opened, ran in eagerly, 'Has it come?' 'No, but it
will.'

'It has come.' As the younger one left the room an older one entered it.
That mail had brought her a legacy. Not one of us, not she I think, had
had any thought of it, nor had I any knowledge of its existence. She put
the whole clear hundred pounds into my hands, and we all met together
and worshipped.

Straight on from that day (February 6, 1918) the nurseries have been
given. When this one was finished and another was needed, our friend
Miss McDougall, Principal of the Women's Christian College, Madras,
chanced to be with us. Usually we keep our matters of this kind entirely
among ourselves, but this friend was one with whom it was possible to
wait on God not only in prayer, but in that silence into which such
prayer sometimes passes whether one will or not.

It was an evening early in January when we were brought to the point of
having at once to decide to go on or to wait. Stone was to be had at a
lower price than usual if we could buy at once. A man in our village had
bought it meaning to build a house; but when he came to count the cost
he found he had not the wherewithal (the parables are Eastern to the
lightest syllable). He wanted to sell that stone as soon as possible to
avoid the laugh of the village, and he had had an offer; but if we
closed at once with him he would sell at a less price to us, because we
would, he knew, pay honestly, and we should have our nurseries'
foundations ready hewn for us, and so save time and money.

We do not have committees at Dohnavur, we commit, as one of our number
recently explained to a questioning friend, in a different way. 'It
sounds very unpractical,' said the other, tired out as she was by a long
spell of committees. We have not found it so.

That evening round the dinner table we knelt down and asked for
guidance. The servants were clearing away. We had not meant to have a
long time of prayer, but we did not find access at first, and prayer
passed into the silence of which I have spoken. The servants slipped in
and out and did their work quietly. And still we waited. When at last we
rose from our knees we all knew we had received the thing that we had
desired of the Lord, even clear guidance. Next day the stone was
ordered.

We had hardly begun when a letter came from home, from one whose name
was unknown to us till then. A legacy (blessed be legacies) had fallen
to him, and he wanted to give us a nursery as a praise offering for
Peace. The next was not begun when from another country came the
proceeds of the sale of a little motor-car, £100. Then came in the same
direct way another hundred, gift of an old invalid friend, a gift so out
of proportion to his way of living that the very angels must have
wondered. That gift, according to his desire, is marked 'Anon.' in our
gift book; but the angels know.

It was by this time September 1919. Rice was still very high in price;
carts bringing it had to be escorted by police, so frequent were the
raids upon it and so impossible was it ever to track the raiders. There
was nothing particularly inspiring in the circumstances of the time and
we did not feel at all like doing more building. Just then a palm-tree
grower in our neighbourhood had to cut down his palms, and he offered
the timber (the best of its kind for roofs) at a good rate if we would
take it all, enough for eight new nurseries. But this meant more than we
were prepared to consider; we had never done such a thing before, and we
dismissed it as impossible.

Before, however, the refusal had gone, it came to us in a new way. What
if there is in this an intended stimulus to faith that, whatever the
difficulties in saving these children, many more will yet be saved and
all required for their care will come too? Can we not gird up the loins
of our mind and enquire of our God concerning it? So we did this,
waiting on Him on the morning of September 13, having boldness to enter
into the holiest by the blood of Jesus. And contrary, if I may put it,
to our expectations, we knew that we were to order the wood.

The order had not left the house before the post came. It brought two
letters of widely different purport. The first was the one quoted before
about the limelight, and advertising our needs thereby. The second
contained £126, and the words the giver said were to be entered into the
book of gifts were these: '*Have faith in God*.'

So we went on, till the sudden fall in supplies stopped for the time our
nursery building, as we had to use what had been given to us for
nurseries, for food, sure that when the storm had passed the birds would
fly to, us again with meat for us morning and evening, and then we
should return what we had drawn from that ready money, the nursery
account. And yet it was one of the perplexities of the time, for had not
the guidance been clear to go on building? Some questions are not
answered at once; we must wait till our tomorrow. But let no one think
that it is a light and easy thing to be guided in this way, something
that can be taken up in a casual 'It-will-come-all-right-in-the-end'
spirit. Clouds and darkness are round about Him, and there are times
when the breath of these eternal mists seems to hang round the ways of
the soul that would press hard after Him.

The months passed. Supplies came. The refunds were made. Nurseries begun
were finished, and the last of that group was called Thanksgiving.
# 17. ‘Before Ye Ask Him’

In South India we have two building seasons; they are fitted between the
two rains and the two harvests. During the two months or more of
harvest, labour is double price, and during the rains of course building
cannot be done. Just after our last rains we found that it was advisable
to go on with the nursery building, and that for various reasons to
build two together would be more economical than to build them one by
one. There was money in hand which was to spare, as it would not be
needed for a month or two, when the harvest bill would devour it all;
but then, as I have told, in our nursery building work we always count
on the sum required coming clear and whole, and not made up of small
pieces. So as it was necessary to go on at once in order to do as much
as possible before the harvest, which here begins in February, we very
definitely asked for a special gift sufficient for that need to come
soon. And the word given so clearly that we wrote it down in our logbook
was this: 'Your Father knoweth what things ye have need of *before ye
ask Him*.' If the money had not been already sent it would be too late
for the season, so we took it that it was already on its way, and
directed the men to go on. The date was November 22, 1920.

Next day we had occasion to go into the affair of stone, earth and wood.
As the wood was bought and a good deal of stone ready, we thought that
between ninety and a hundred pounds should suffice for the two rooms.
The price of wood had almost doubled since we bought that good timber
before the difficult months set in. The thought of that guidance so
kindly definite, and the saving effected thereby, was an encouragement
now. But even so, it never becomes a small thing to go into the presence
of the Lord with these petitions, and on the morning of November 26,
while the stars were still shining, I went to the word upon which we had
been caused to hope: 'Your Father knoweth what things ye have need of
*before ye ask Him*.' The words seemed to leap out from the page:
*before ye ask Him*.

Five hours later a letter came with exactly the sum (£100) we had
thought of as the limit of our need for those two nurseries.

'It is with a feeling of joy that I send you the enclosed cheque for
£100,' wrote the giver. And she told how and when the desire to send it
was laid upon her. It was several weeks before we ourselves were aware
of the need, and the letter was written twenty days before we asked for
it to be supplied.

'Your letter filled my heart with joy,' is a happy word just received.
'I was so very thankful to find how definitely I had been led. I wish I
could send you £100 every year, but it has been taken out of capital,
not income.' And the letter ends with 'heart's joy', a gift it is our
Father's custom to give to His givers.

In that ancient writing, The Wisdom of Solomon, occur these beautiful
words about Wisdom: 'She is a treasure unto men that never faileth…Good,
quick, which cannot be letted, ready to do good, kind to man, steadfast,
sure, overseeing all things.'

Surely this blessed Wisdom must walk as familiar friend with those who,
sensitive to the lightest touch, can be so directed that, quick and not
to be letted, their doings reach this remote little place in time to
unfold the word of the Lord upon which He has caused us to trust.

What is distance to Him, or remoteness, or smallness, or unimportance?
(And we are the least in our Father's house, who live at His hand in
this way.) 'Wisdom reacheth from one end to another mightily, and
sweetly doth she order all things.' 'In His hand are all the corners of
the earth', is one of our words in Dohnavur. He can reach from the
centre to the corner or from corner to corner, and truly very sweetly
doth He order all things.

Is it strange then that we fear earth's limelight, do not feel the need
of it rather, having through the tender grace of our God this other
whose bright shining is never laid to sleep? 'For she is more beautiful
than the sun and above all order of stars; being compared with the light
she is found before it.'

Facts of finance, are they dry and dull, and sapless as mere sums? Oh,
let the song go round the earth: 'The unfolding of His words giveth
light. The love of the Lord passeth all things for illumination.' Is
there any end to it?
# 18. Daisies

I do not think there is. Long ago Samuel Rutherford said he despaired to
win to the far end of that love, there were so many plies in it. 'All
other things are shadows, dreams, fancies and nothing.'

Over and over again we have had some rather large bill looming ahead:
medical stores, for example, come to a fabulous amount these days, and
cholera times in the villages round us consume quantities of some of the
most expensive. These bills are paid at home and usually by the
gatherings up of many little gifts.

'Lest man grown dazzled straining at the sun\
 Should find Him not and doubt what He had done,\
 God stooping, wrote upon the ground in daisies.'

'We got some very touching gifts for the sale. One was from a poor blind
woman who is dying. She wished to give something, so asked a friend to
look through her belongings. She had a shawl which had been knitted by
another blind woman even poorer than she is. She bought it many years
ago from her. This she gave to the sale, a beautiful shawl. When we told
her it had been sold and that the price was £2 she said, "Do not think I
gave so much. It cost me 7s. 6d. many many years ago." In case you think
we were exorbitant (it is understood that there shall never be unfair
prices charged in connection with our work) Mother had it valued. The
value was £2 5s. to £2 10s. There was a poor girl who had nothing to
give, so she gave any treasures she had. One was a workbasket, a
present; also two cups and saucers.'

'It is such a joy to be able to send the enclosed.' (Most of our letters
begin like that.) 'It is half the proceeds of the sale of three pieces
of jewelry. The most valuable of these was left by my mother, and this
made it very precious to me; but I could not withstand the impelling
power of the Holy Spirit who was prompting me to give the best for
Christ's sake. This was the thought He gave me: By turning this pendant
into money for the Lord's work I should be laying up treasure in heaven
where my dear one is, therefore it would be another link to draw us
closer together.

'This jewelry was sold by auction and the reserve price was much lower
than I thought it should be; but the auctioneer assured me it would not
fetch much more. However, I was determined that it should, and I asked
six friends to join with me in prayer on the day of the sale that the
price might be run up. The result was that it was sold for £10 more than
the reserve.'

That thought of laying up treasure in heaven came to the mother of the
one to whose care this little book owes its setting forth of accounts,
unconfused by the confusions of exchange. Her father had the large gold
medal of Trinity College, Dublin, and the daughter had one too.

These treasures of years have been offered by her widowed mother, who,
having given her only daughter, has with her also freely given all
things she has to give. When it felt to us impossible to touch this so
precious gold, the beautiful answer came, ' *It is the only way by which
I can keep it always*.'

And there are givers whose gifts, as the angels see them, must appear as
spiritual adventures in the land of Utmost Faith.

There is one, quite poor, so poor that a friend seeing her felt she must
give her a little gift. A joyous look, more joyous than a personal good
could have awakened, lighted the face of our friend, and she told the
one who had given the gift that she had been praying for something to
give to the two places just then laid upon her heart. One of the two was
Dohnavur.

And again in the same kind land there is another who suffers greatly,
and can usually only be relieved by surgical help. But once, lately, it
was laid on her to pray for healing by the touch of the Lord alone, and
that healing came. The sum thus set free was given to Dohnavur, for
whose sake she had sought that so blessedly inexpensive touch of life.
She too is one whose riches are not of this world's gold.

But space would fail to tell of the company of the Lord's own Poor,
those who in very fact company with Him who had not where to lay His
head. And how often, when such gifts came, even as at the coming of
those great welcome cheques which lifted us over some 'impossible'
thing, we have rejoiced to remember the invisible roll book, the book of
the Lord's remembrance.

*Daisies*, we have called this chapter. The word is from a poem in a
forgotten book, *Lyrics from the Hills*, by C. A. Fox.

From thy little snowy frill\
 Taking heaps of coined gold\
 With a hearty right goodwill,\
 In thy innocency bold\
 Thou dost offer back to God,\
 All unasked, thy precious load.

Not always heaps of coined gold, but precious with the love that is
golden, the gifts come thus that help us to carry on.
# 19. The Three £100

We are not an orphanage, nor are our children able to go here and there
in safety. We have only kept out of manifold trouble by a careful and
purposeful avoidance of publicity. But as faithful delicate Indian
workers began to flag, and our children to need change, and we
ourselves, being unable to leave them, could not go to the distant
hills, it seemed apparent that some place of our own near by, and yet in
at least comparative coolness, would be a great boon, and we began to
search the forest behind Dohnavur for some place suitable. After
frequent search and many vicissitudes at last we found it. Hidden in a
deep recess, which at about 2,500 feet up opens horseshoe-fashion into a
glorious mountain-guarded curve, was an old coffee estate of nearly 40
acres belonging to a Muhammadan, who lived near us and was willing to
sell.

One of the rich temples of our neighbourhood owns the ravines, on either
side, and was ready to buy up this one. Its price was £100.

But we had not thought of buying anything so extensive or expensive, and
we had thought of a much smaller undertaking; and yet it was a very
desirable place, and there was no other to be had anywhere near Dohnavur
to be compared for convenience, or health, or beauty. So we asked for a
sign, a hundred pounds in one clear gift, if this was our Father's plan
for us. It did at first sight seem a great deal to ask; but the God who
had found one hundred rupees when that was the need, and had sent it as
a sign that we were on the right path, could as easily find a hundred
pounds if it were required, could as easily find a thousand if He wished
us to have it. But we did not need a thousand at that moment, so we did
not ask for it. We asked for just one hundred.

The date of the prayer was June 11. We returned late in the evening to
find a mail had unexpectedly arrived *and in it was* £100. For a moment
we thought it was the Sign. Then we found it was distinctly ear-marked
'For a Forest House.' But how could we build a Forest House if we had no
forest to build it in? Or was it that we were to be content with the
smaller thought of the previous months, and build in the few acres the
Forest Department might let us use? Thus being uncertain, we waited.
There were temptations to hurry; for the Temple authorities were moving,
and with them money is nothing. That particular temple owns lakhs of
rupees and much land. But the hazard of losing the place was as nothing
compared with the hazard of running before the Lord. 'It may cost what
thou knowest not to bring thee home from there.'

So till August 25 we waited, and on that day in the early morning we set
forth with a friend, experienced traveller in many lands, who was
staying with us at the time, to look at the place again.

It charmed him. 'If only I had the means I would buy it at once,' he
said, and tried hard to get the owner who was there at the time,
dwelling in a cave on the face of a cliff, to let us buy a small part of
it, the site that struck him as perfect for a house. But the old man was
firm. He would sell all or none. He knew he could sell all to the Temple
if we did not rise to it, and no one can explain why he waited so long
for us. The only explanation is, we think, that in the purposes of our
God the place was marked for us.

We knelt down among the grey boulders in whose crevices wild pine-apples
were growing, their pinky crimson tufts of fruit and spikes of
blue-green leaves showing brightly on the grey, and we prayed for some
clear sign, something we could not possibly mistake, to assure us that
the whole enchanting ravine with its uncontaminated water (for the
heights above were unexploited, being too steep for commercial uses) was
to be ours.

It was late when we reached home. Again a premature mail was in; but we
were tired and went to bed without opening it. In the morning *we found
again a hundred pounds*.

And yet (for there was no word with it, the giver, a dear Irish friend,
being in Paradise) we still hesitated. Looking back, now that we have
possessed the ravine for three years and cannot imagine ourselves
without it, it is quite difficult to understand how we could. 'Many were
gathered together praying…She told how Peter stood before the gate. And
they said unto her, Thou art mad. And when they had opened the door,
they were astonished.' Was it that? I hardly know. It can never fail to
be an astonishing thing when the Lord of all the earth, whose glory is
above the heavens, humbles Himself to behold the things that are in the
earth, such little things, too, as these of ours are. But are there any
limits to His kindness, and is anything little to the God who teaches
the bird no bigger than a butterfly where to find and how to use the
silk cotton in the forest, so that its infinitesimal nest, cup like the
cup in a child's dolls' house, is soft as love can make it for the birds
that are to be?

And yet, I hope we were not astonished in that way. There is certainly
nothing little to Him. I think we know it here. But we greatly feared to
run before and embark on costly follies, for land is the least of forest
expenses, as we were soon to find. And yet it did look like the Sign
repeated in order that we might go on without a doubt that this was to
be, and four days later it was shown that we might take it so. On
September 14 the place was ours, and the Sign was confirmed indeed when
*a third gift of exactly that sum* (£100) *came ear-marked for its
purchase*, so that down to the smallest detail the way was cleared
before us.

Told thus it must seem as if hundreds of pounds had a pleasant habit of
dropping on us; so, in order that it may be known that this was indeed
of the Lord at that time, and for a purpose definite and distinct, it
should be told that this was not so. Six months passed before anything
approaching such a gift reached us. And even then it was a broken sum
and not, as we had asked, a complete round hundred. Tales such as these,
gathered together in one small space, will mislead and do more harm than
good, if it is not remembered that they were the striking hours among
the thousands of minutes, or, put into sky language, the bright groups
of stars set here and there among a multitude of lesser lights. Each is
indeed a light, a sun; what should we do without our great spaces of
many little stars? And the dark between, those times in life when
neither sun nor stars in many days appear, do we not need them too? But
He that is as the morning star in the midst of a cloud, as the moon at
the full, as the sun shining upon the temple of the Most High, and as
the rainbow giving light in the bright clouds, as the flower of roses in
the spring of the year, as lilies by the rivers of waters, He in whom
alone all glories and all sweetnesses meet, does at times in the lives
of His lovers set His comforts in constellations, to the glory of His
name.
# 20. Interior Conversations

It is extraordinary how often the father of lies overreaches himself in
his untruth-telling. We ought to write down these disproved statements
of his sometimes, for the benefit of those whom he persistently worries;
but life is full, there is hardly time to live, much less to set down
all that is in it. Still, sometimes such episodes are distinct in
emphasis, and looking back we remember the years of the right hand of
the Most High, and are reinforced in faith.

Such an hour stands out now as I write. It lay in one of the spaces
between the lighting of the stars.

'Most of your friends at home are getting old.'

'Well, so is everybody.'

(We have a dear little girl here who regularly sets these occasions
forth as interior conversations. I am following her example.)

'But there will soon be nobody left at home who cares in the least for
you.'

'God can give us new friends.'

'Oh, but old friends are far better.'

There are some points it is difficult to argue and I forget how this was
countered, perhaps by the happy fact that new friends grow into old
friends in time; but the last shaft was, 'Well, look at your Gift Book.
There is hardly a name now that was there when you began.'

'There is So-and-so, and So-and-so,' a few dear names rose in the
heart's affections.

Within a week one of the dearest of them was gone.

'I told you so,' said the devil.

He then talked much: he assured me the husband, a retired Indian
Colonel, would never think of us again. Of course, as we do not count
that a gift, or twenty-five years of gifts, contain the promise of even
one more, he was quite out in this kind of talk, and yet it had a little
worrying sting in its tail. We should miss the faithful friends when
they passed. I could not say that we should not.

Almost at once from that lonely old man the flow of gifts began again.
We receipted them to her name as well as to his, writing the two
together on the little 'Inasmuch' receipt slip as of old. Why not? She
was more alive than ever.

And these gifts continued, everything in connection with the wife who
was on the other side of death seemed to remind the husband of the
little place she had loved for so many years. And it did seem as if the
tempter, prince of prevaricators, had his completest answer when a
money-order came for the amount which she would have spent on her year's
dress, had she not put off her mortal clothing and put on the immortal.
# 21. There Is No Want in the Fear of the Lord

We have a joyfully large group of workers in Dohnavur, though, when one
regards the reach of country all round us, with its opportunities
bounded only by strength, and the great work to be accomplished in the
training of those who will, we trust, if the Lord tarries, carry the
message far and wide, our band seems small enough. Still, every English
worker means a one-roomed cottage and some furniture. We build cottage
fashion, nursery or worker's room it matters not which, with the back
verandah made into a bathroom, that luxury of Indian life, and so we can
interchange, worker changing with a group of children or vice versa as
is most expedient for the work. Our buildings have been proved healthy,
even though they are small for the East and lower than Government would
sanction if we had to wait for its passing of plans. The fresh air blows
round them if there is any to blow, there is the restful blessing of
privacy-in short, they suffice for us. But it will be seen that as new
workers mean new cottages and their furnishings, however simple, a good
deal of expenditure might have to be incurred under this head alone.

Our way here is to furnish a room from a room. Each which finds itself
possessed of more than it requires, contributes that extra; but
naturally there are limits to this kind of giving, and furniture, if it
has any wear in it, is not inexpensive, though we spend as little as may
be on it.

The building of these cottages and the furnishing thereof, would fill
books of stories of those wonderful little loving-kindnesses that touch
one more nearly, perhaps, than the greater and more awe-inspiring gifts
of love.

The first gift of furniture for the children came from a C.M.S.
missionary. Not a word of the surprise in store for us had reached us;
but one morning a bandy jingled up to the door and, to our amazement,
disgorged a beautiful little school bench for the babies, a tiny easel,
and all the other minutiae of a complete set of beginnings. At that time
we had not one anna to spend on such things. The older children were
helping to build our first mud wall, carrying on their unaccustomed
little heads the baskets of earth for the builders to stamp into clay.
We keep that mud wall still, to remind us of what great things God has
wrought for us.

But the rooms: sometimes an I.C.S. friend has written that he is going
on leave and wants to sell a few trifles. We send for them (and note the
kind prices) and find the trifles are just what we were needing. Or a
guest on his homeward way stops at Colombo, that treasure house of nice
things, and sends us what we should never have bought for ourselves.

Once we were short of china; we remember it because there were not even
coffee cups to serve our guests' coffee after dinner, and there were no
tea cups either, just great clumsy breakfast cups which were most
uninviting. We could have bought some, but wanted our money for the
children. Shortly afterwards, a friend coming out to us for a visit
brought a whole blue set, and we ourselves (and our guests if they knew
it) handle nothing less than gifts from Him who long ago said, 'Your
Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.'

But space would fail to tell all, or a tithe of all, the private stories
of this place. It is as if its Owner and ours wanted to set us night and
day free for the one thing for which we are here, and so He does not
cause us to spend much time over life's lesser necessities.

Once, some years ago, he who was then our Collector rode over to see us.
He was interested and wanted to help us, and he naturally thought a
Government grant would be good for us. We told him why we felt clearer
without it. Then he asked us how we lived. We told him. He pointed to
the buildings. We told him how they came to be. 'Can I do nothing for
you?' he said. 'Save a child if you have a chance,' was our word then,
and he went away.

A year or so later I was in Madras, hearing of the fight for a child a
brave woman there had carried on for months, and of her all but failure.
She was old, worn with many years of labours, and she had almost given
up. Then that man who had been our Collector came forward. A touch from
one high up in Government Service can do much if a kind heart is behind.
That touch set the child's life free. Would it have been the same, we
wondered, if the one precious half-hour we spent together had been taken
up with questions of finance?

So we have proved it a thousand times and are still proving it: if we
are about our Father's business He takes care for ours. There is no want
in the fear of the Lord and it needeth not to seek help. 'My son, lead
not a beggar's life,' said the wise man long ago. Last year's hot
weather comes to mind, another of those happenings which some will call
coincidences but others will see as something more precious, more
intimate.

Several of our number needed the cold of the Hills. Our forest is not so
much tonic as rest. But the Hill expenses are now necessarily large, and
it was the time of the worst exchange. So no one wanted to spend money
on holidays, anything there was to spare went, of course, to the work.
Just then a District Forest Officer stayed with a friend of ours, and
being refreshed in spirit gave her a cheque which was to be spent on
bringing those up to the Hills who were kept down by the adverse
exchange. Part of the cheque was sent to us. It was impossible to
refuse, and to the Hills three of our number went, and returned
refreshed. May cool winds blow through the heats of life for that
unknown D.F.O., till we meet where the sun shall not light on him, nor
any heat.
# 22. Will Not the Brother Take Care of the Sister?

Does the tale become monotonous? Very many days of His secret dealings,
His private teachings, lie between each fact of help recorded, and
perhaps if I uncover one such lesson in the school of faith it may help
some younger learner. And because there is in most of us a tendency to
expect what, for want of a better name, we call miracles to happen in
the far future as they happened in the far past, rather than in this
ordinary today, I will tell of one of the latest.

On June 24, 1919, we were seeking for guidance about one who, evidently
called to join us, had signed herself, 'Yours in His obedience'. We had
accepted her offer before we even thought of asking about ways and
means. When the question rose, as of course it must sooner or later, we
found £100 was required, and the circumstances were such as to cause us
to face out this matter of trusting our God for His workers' needs as
well as for the needs of His children. Put in that way it reads rather
absurdly; but after all that was the heart of the question, and we went
straight to its heart in thinking of it.

Up to that time we had not definitely faced it. Some who had need of
supplies had been led to us in different ways, but in each case there
had been definite guidance. Now the matter was rather this: are we to be
ready for whatever new thing in this line may be shown to be the will of
our God for us?

Alone with Him that morning in June my reading had been in St. Mark
iii., 'And He looked round about on them which sat about Him, and said,
Behold My mother and My brethren. For whosoever shall do the will of God
the same is My brother, *and My sister*, and mother.' (Mar
3:34-35.)…'Will not the Brother take care of the sister?'

It was not a little question. It meant launching sheer off the shore. We
had nothing tangible behind us; we had just God.

And now, was He asking us to trust Him for any whom He should send?
Surely if that word-'the same is My sister'-meant anything (and we know
His lightest word means not anything but everything), it meant He was
prepared to be responsible for His obedient ones. Of the preciousness of
such gifts, beside which money, however needful, looks so small, I need
not write; words could not tell it.

Still looking up for direction upon this matter, and waiting for that
certainty without which action is impossible, I read on through the
chapters following, seeing new lines of connections running from page to
page, like those wonderful, all but invisible threads, that run from
cell to cell of the leaf through the delicate cell walls.

For first comes the story of the Sower. The Sower soweth the word: for
the moment all sowers but Christ the Eternal moved across the field and
out of sight. He sows the seed, such a seed as this new word; our part
then is to make room for it, see to it that no stray bird flies off with
it, no shallow-heartedness causes it to be futile in operation, no crowd
of cares or delusive other things choke it. From the perils of the hard,
the shallow, the preoccupied, good Lord, deliver us.

Then follows the word on the quietness of faith. As if a man should cast
the seed into the ground; and should sleep and should rise night and
day, and the seed should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how. No need
to fuss and worry. No need even to understand the mystery of the how of
things: he knoweth not how. And again in the storm story, chapter v. Our
Lord was in the hinder part of the ship asleep on a pillow. He who slept
in the boat when a great storm of wind beat upon it and it was full of
water, can keep us in quietness of heart whatever our circumstances be.
The Lord of peace Himself give you peace at all times, in all ways, is
no phantom prayer, no mere cry of desire. God's comforts are no dreams.
'And it shall be as it were a great motion; but the place where thou
standest, shall not be moved.'

And so, in simplicity, but how vitally may our lives declare, we went on
learning of Him, till we came to chapter vi. with its familiar teaching,
never more appropriate than now. For some had counselled us to 'reduce
our numbers' (how?); to retrench in various ways (why?); and there we
see the poor puzzled disciples proposing the same thing exactly: 'Send
them away.' They wanted to arrange for an orderly failure, and all the
time He had something so different in His heart, for He Himself knew
what He would do.

And then, the miracle over, with its strange sense of exaltation of
spirit, the tremendous trial of apparent forgetfulness on the part of
the very Master they had seen able to provide, at a moment's notice,
ready-cooked fish, ready-baked bread, and who therefore could surely
have made a peaceful way for them through any wind.

'I wish and pray that the Lord would harden my face against all, and
make me to learn to go with my face against a storm.' Is not that almost
the last lesson of faith?

Then comes Peter with his leap out of the boat, and the Lord's way of
dealing with his fear, not 'Wherefore didst thou come?' but 'Wherefore
didst thou doubt?' For fear is nothing else but a surrender of the
succours which reason offereth. Woes our dear Lord ever rebuke us for
walking to Him upon the water? But, and this is the pith of faith of the
kind we are now considering, we must be sure that He Himself, and not
another, has said to us, 'Come.' 'Lord, *if it be Thou*, bid me come
unto Thee on the water.'

*In guidance, everything depends upon that If*.

This lesson, so imperfectly told, was given and dated on June 24, 1919.
On that same day all of us waiting together, as our custom is, became
assured that the mind of our Lord had been made known. And on July 12, a
friend in England who, though much loving us, knew nothing of these
matters, which were kept entirely between our Lord and ourselves, wrote
as follows:

'About three weeks ago' (note the date) 'I sent a cheque value £100 to
the Manager of the Bank of Madras, to be placed to the credit of the
Dohnavur Nurseries Account, which kindly use for the need of the
moment.' This cheque therefore had been sent off close upon, if not
exactly upon, the day the need for this sum had been shown to us, and
the mind of our Lord made known.
# 23. Proverbs 27:27

The drought of 1918 will long be remembered by the people in these
parts; their cattle died.

We had till then been able to get almost all the milk we required from
the villages near by. Morning and evening, from a dozen villages
streamed the too old to work and the too young to work, each tottery old
body and toddly young one engaged in carrying a small brass vessel full
of buffalo or cow's milk, to be tested and, if it passed the test,
bought. Now we could get very little and that little with much
difficulty. Condensed milk was a fabulous price, and besides it did not
suit all, nor would it have built up healthy children. We needed over
two hundred rupees' worth of milk a month at that time and could only
buy about ninety rupees' worth, so we were in real difficulty, and when
in our reading we came upon Proverbs xxvii. 27, it was no small comfort.
Then and there, we rested ourselves upon that comfortable word, 'Milk
enough for thy food, for the food of thy household, and for the
maintenance for thy maidens,' and watched for its fulfilment. The date
was November 3.

On November 6, we were able to buy three buffaloes; on the 9th, four
more buffaloes and two cows; on January 8, two more cows.

Things had got worse. In December we were only able to buy forty rupees'
worth of milk from outside; but the little herd acquired in the month of
the promise helped us through.

But this was not all the good contained in that sure word. The village
people needed help; we greatly desired to help them; but to give, even
if we could have given, would not have helped them in the best way.

Is there anything our Father does not take thought about? On June 6,
1919, a gift reached us, the first we had ever had marked 'Famine
relief' (for we had not said much of the trouble, knowing it was worse
in other places). We had till now sheltered the animals in temporary
sheds. But something more was needed, and at once we began famine relief
work for the villagers, who flocked to us most thankfully. It was
wonderful to watch the money coming. Once for a special reason there was
strong temptation to anxiety. I was alone in the forest at the moment
seeing about something there, and my mail sent up was opened under
difficult circumstances. Only He who was there with me knew what it was
to open a letter containing a gift from poor folk in one of our great
home cities, from whom I had never thought anything would ever come
again (they had been loving givers for years, but now circumstances had
changed and what they had to give would be needed, I had thought,
elsewhere). It was the largest gift they had ever sent, and it was
enough to complete the purchase of all the cattle we then required for
the food of our household, and for the maintenance of our maidens,
according to the promise of the Lord.

Herd, barns, byres, and farm-well came together to £388 16s. 1½d., or in
Rs. 5,832.1.7, and we wrote up words from the book of the promise, in
the milk-cows' byre, 'Be thou diligent…Look well to thy herds. The
righteous man knoweth how his cattle feel.' (The second being
Delitzsch's translation of Proverbs 12:10.)

Christmas Day is a joyful day for the cattle as well as for the children
they serve. Their places are decorated (because our Saviour was born in
a manger), and they have lotus buds fastened between their horns, for
the little cow-boys are quite sure this is the proper thing to do. They
have, too (as on every Sunday), extra treats, a bath and the food they
like best. And though they are only poor little cattle of South India
(for the beautiful large beasts Government stocks on its farms are far
beyond our purse), they are cared for as the gifts of God should be, and
to our thankfulness we hear that all round about us animals are used a
little more gently than they used to be, because it is known that we
never hurt ours, never brand on them the cruel hideous patterns of the
country, a branding that makes dreadful for some of us one whole week
every spring. [With the coming of doctors who care for animals, a new
thing has been seen in this countryside-operations on bulls and cows
done mercifully under an anesthetic.]
# 24. Blessed Be Such Coincidences

Over and over again during this writing I have stopped, gone to our
account books and gifts books, and once again verified every fact, and
to make doubly sure got D. C. W., whose work is embodied in the
accounts, to verify them for me, lest by any chance any mistake should
slip in unawares. From the beginning of the work the accounts have had
the help of careful overlooking. First Mr. Walker, whose mathematics
lent themselves to such small things without protest, used to initial
them every month, and those initials made me feel safe; then when he
passed, another of our number celebrated for accuracy checked them for
me; and then, as if to assure us of a more than fatherly care, the
perplexity of the exchange had no sooner set in than one whose joy is in
figures was given to us; to her this book owes the translation of pounds
to rupees, annas, pies, and to her, too, I owe the work set forth at the
end of the book. For the sake of simplicity the pound has been counted
as fifteen rupees, all through, for the perpetual changes of exchange
would confuse the English reader.

Finally we have had the help of our oldest friend in India, Rev. John
Stewart, Secretary of the United Free Church of Scotland Mission. One
would hesitate to ask such help from a busy mission Secretary, however
kind, but old friendship makes such things possible, and the result of
all this is, this little book is no fairy tale, but just true. Those to
whom such ways of the Lord are familiar will not need this word of
assurance, but there are some for whom it is required. And though to the
writer every page suggests time, place, occasion, to verify each little
happening, and to recall afresh that eternal comfort and good hope
granted in hours without number to the least and weakest of all His
family, has been very nourishing to faith.

Among the records which were thus looked up, and handled, is a long
envelope with the Toronto postmark, and according to the sensible
Canadian and American fashion; with an address printed in the corner.

Inside this envelope is a letter annotated to the following effect: The
sum we had prayed for was £50. The first letter opened contained three
gifts, one for £8 12s. 9d., one for £12 10s. and one for 10s. There was
nothing in any other letter till we came to this long envelope at the
bottom of the pile. In it was a draft for \$147.39, or in pounds, £31
15s. 2d. £8 12s. 9d., plus £12 10s., plus 10s., plus £31 15s. 2d. = £53
7s. 11d.

For the two who opened that mail together, the happy memory of that gift
is set in green wood, by a running river. It came when two of us were in
the forest, and we two and the others in Dohnavur had been specially
asking for £50 by that mail. The joy of receiving it is vivid in me now.
Was it only a coincidence? Blessed be such coincidences.
# 25. New Moons

This story of supplies is being written in the midst of life, often
interrupted life; the interruptions themselves would make a book. The
last one was the deliverance from a tangle of troubles in connection
with that net for the feet of the unwary, a Court case. The six small
jewels upon which that net was to have been spread, are lying upon the
table beside me, and the collapse of the trouble which had already eaten
up more time than we cared to spend over it, was thus expressed by one
of the repentant creators of it, 'For you move with God, therefore is
the fear of this offence upon us.' May it be true, that we always move
with God.

But sometimes sweeter, cleaner things interrupt, and one such perfectly
fits into the page now to be written. Yesterday Veerun, aged three and
three-quarters, thus explained the reappearance in the east of the moon
which he had seen disappearing over the mountains in the west. It is a
glorified game of ball. God takes the moon in His hands when it touches
the mountains, and He throws it across the sky; that is how it gets
there new every evening; there can be no other way. There have been some
who have explained the new every morning coming of our help, by the
tossing of a book or a letter across the sea from east to west. It
reappears in the form of a handful of silver or a convenient cheque. But
is it so? We think it has another, a more enduring explanation.

At the beginning of the war those who felt that anything so invisibly
supplied could not go on through such a cataclysm, told us we should be
'finished' (Tamil idiom, and the very word of Lam. iii. 22, 'It is of
the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed.' See Young's Analytical
Concordance). And we felt to the very marrow of our bones that what they
said was true, unless those compassions continued in very marked
fashion. And we asked then, so that there should always be little
faggots for the fires of faith, that not one mail throughout the war
might be empty of help. And it was so. Our Gift Book shows it. Sometimes
there was very little; but always there was something. Not a single mail
through those five years failed us in this regard, and the gifts came
from many diverse places: Australia and New Zealand, China,
out-of-the-way corners of Canada, several of her cities and cities of
the U.S.A., South Africa and North Africa (this last a gift from Arabian
women), Central Africa, and the troubled countries of Europe, even from
Germany itself through Switzerland; for nothing, not even such a war,
can separate those who love in Christ.

Was it letters brought that? Letters never ask for money, but even if
they did, could they have penetrated to Germany? Books do not do so
either; and if they could have accounted for its coming we should indeed
'be finished' now, for several of them are out of print. Sometimes when
we read the home papers with their advertisements, and money-drawing
paragraphs, we feel if we had any to give we could not keep it, the
difficulty would be to know which appeal appealed most poignantly, and
whether to give it all to that one or divide it among all. The only
thing we know is that we could not keep an anna. 'The cruellest man
alive could not sit at his feast unless he sat blindfold,' as was said
long ago, and even if he were blindfolded he would need to be deafened
too. And we wonder, as we ache to help all those piteous needs, how
anything ever reaches us, for we cannot jostle in among them, and we
cannot even send a photograph that has anything vital in it. You cannot
photograph the child's soul that is being slowly murdered. You cannot
even describe it in words. They would burn the paper if you tried. How
then is it that we are not wholly forgotten, crushed out of memory by
these other real and tellable things? Little Veerun and his moon is no
help here. Surely the only explanation for the going on, not of one
small family only, but of all the families and companies to whom has
been given this special charge to keep, is just this:-

'It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed, because His
compassions fail not. They are new every morning.' New, as the 'new'
moon (the exact Hebrew adjective) old but ever new, for ever and for
ever.
# 26. Barclay's Bank

And they are new too, perpetually new, in the diversity of their
creation, like the small young buds that open in the morning, perpetual
surprises.

I have hesitated to tell of one such because it is so small, too small
and warm with human life for cold and formal print. And yet it was not
too small to comfort us exceedingly.

For those whose money comes in pounds, and who therefore were doubly
afflicted when the pound steadily fell in value and prices as steadily
rose, the year 1919 has a shape of its own. It was an iron press turned
by a screw which had no regard for our feelings. And we, the creatures
inside it, wondered what would happen when floor and roof met. Towards
the end of the year two of us went to Madras.

We chanced to arrive on a day when a more than usually serious fall in
exchange had startled the community. There had been no warning, and in
some cases many pounds had been lost by an hour's delay in cashing an
English cheque. Even the wisest were perplexed; and the iron press
became too tame a simile: life was a pair of forceps, with rapidly
closing points, and the place between was not comfortable. Small wonder
that in most gatherings together conversation was dominated by the
rupee.

What is it makes the spiritual atmosphere of a place or a house? We did
not find the atmosphere of Madras stimulating to the kind of faith we,
at least, required, and as day succeeded day and no news came of help
having reached Dohnavur by mail, we felt the need of a fresh reviving if
we were to fight with gladness the battles of Israel, and walk these new
ways in the quietness of peace.

One day, a day upon which we had expected good news, letters of sorrow
came. There had been that heartbreak of all heartbreaks, spiritual
defeat at Dohnavur; a fight for a soul had been lost. So our flesh had
no rest. But we were troubled on every side: without were fightings,
within were fears. 'Nevertheless,' most blessed word that cleaves the
cloud and lets the blue shine through, God that comforteth those that
are cast down comforted us by the coming of a friend, the friend of our
New Year's fellowship in prayer. She took me in her car to the beach.
There, by the slowly darkening sea, for it was evening, we sat on the
sand and watched the waves roll up. The glory of an Indian sunset fell
and filled the atmosphere, lights were lighted along the shore, sea and
sky and shore suffused with colour passed into one another, and a great
hush held the world. But the waves rolled up from unimaginable distances
and broke at our feet and a voice was in their sound: 'Faint not to be
strong in the Lord. For as His majesty is so is His mercy,' and what His
majesty is, let the great sea declare. Blessed be the Lord God for
friends, for air and water and the beauty of coloured light. What is man
that Thou art mindful of him, that Thou with hand so various, renewest
him with 'secret refreshings'? What is man? But he is Thine, O Lord,
Thou Lover of souls.

Consoled, reinforced in faith, for who could fear by such a sea? we
returned to the mission house to meet the kindly questions of Canon Sell
of the C.M.S., whose fatherly heart could not let him rest without
asking us how things were with us, for he knew that all that came to us
came in pounds, and what was the pound worth now?

But the sound of the sea was in our ears, and we did not tell him
anything, except that we were sure our needs would be supplied; for we
knew to the missionary financier our position would seem exceedingly
precarious, though indeed the word would have been much too mild for him
if he had seen our gift book at that hour, still more so could he have
foreseen its readings a month later when we touched bottom at £35.[But
though we told him nothing of this, his kindness was not satisfied, and
he arranged for a regular grant to help us with the work. This, however,
we felt we must return, for reasons those who have followed us so far
will understand.]

The weeks that followed were full of work; for arrears had piled up
during our absence, and, though the comfort of that evening by the sea
did not forsake me, I cannot say that it was an easy time for us. We
had, as it will be remembered, begun a new square of nurseries and were
preparing to welcome a new worker. I have told how we regard the coming
of gifts week by week, not only as supplies, without which the work
could not go on, but as guidance, by which we may search and try our
ways and know of very surety that we are not running before we are sent.
The Master is not responsible for that which the servant unsent
attempts. He is responsible to give him the means to do that which He
had directed shall be done. Had we in anything mistaken His wishes,
crossed those light guiding lines laid down on either side? These were
the questions of the time.

But never was a time better to look back upon. Not one of us would have
missed it if we could have chosen. We fed upon the promises, and then we
pleaded the prayer that must have expressed the cry of thousands of
hearts, ' *Remember the word unto Thy servant upon which Thou hast
caused me to hope*.' Such times make such words very spirit and life.

On the last night of those long weeks it was impossible to sleep. I rose
and looked at the mountains in the moonlight, and at the garden on the
other side, with its many nurseries lying so peaceful, so unanxious
among the glimmering trees.

The little young moon did not put out the stars, but the moonshine was
enough to turn the world into a fairyland of beauty, as moonlight always
does in the East, where the very colours show, only in a kind of
holiness, not earthly, other-earthly for beauty.

'But Lord, the children cannot live upon moonlight'; the words were
spoken before I knew, to the all but seen Companion of that quiet hour,
and back came the answer, gentle as the fall of moonbeams upon leaves,
'Yes, I know.'

Then came thoughts of the givers at home, whom the war had greatly
impoverished, and of those gone before, who though they walk on golden
pavements cannot send even a little handful of its dust to us down here;
and as these thoughts rose, comforts answered them, and I went back to
bed and slept.

And then came the dream which, though it was only a dream, had so lovely
a fulfilment that one is tempted to wonder if it was only a dream after
all. For this is it, as it was written down when I awoke, lest it should
float off as so often such things do, and melt like a cloud in the
morning sky.

I seemed to be in a great bank. I thought it was Barclay's Bank. I saw
the broad polished counter and all the paraphernalia of a bank at home.
And then I looked up and saw running round the wall in a kind of frieze
these words:

CASTING ALL YOUR CARE UPON HIM, FOR HE CARETH FOR YOU: YOUR HEAVENLY
FATHER KNOWETH THAT YOU HAVE NEED OF ALL THESE THINGS.

'How good to know Barclay's Bank is like this,' I said aloud, almost
waking myself, and I thought of all the poor troubled people who must go
in and look tip and be comforted. And then I began to wonder if it
really was an earthly bank; but did they have banks in heaven? And with
that I woke, rather unwillingly, for I did not want to leave that very
pleasant place.

That morning the mail came in, as before, unexpected; for in war-time
its comings were irregular and unannounced. The first letter we opened
had this word in it, 'My God shall supply all your need,' and the next
had a cheque for £52 4s. 4d. A day or two later, 'He careth for you'
came written across the flap of an envelope which contained a cheque for
£65. From that time on it was as if a door had been opened and supplies
were let through again.

'But you are hung upon nothing!' It was not a reassuring remark. It was
made to me some nights previous to the night of the dream. I need not
say by whom. There are those who, to his great content, deny his
existence. They have not lived in India, or if they have, they have not
met him in fair fight.

It was the night of the Hindu fast-day of the month, moonless and still,
for the temple worship was over, and the stars set in depths of violet
clearness looked down on me like wise kind eyes of eternal friends, who
from far seats have seen the end of the Lord. A heat mist rose and
covered the face of the world, a vague and dreamy influence that blurred
all outlines, even the outlines of the starlit hills. But the stars
shone triumphantly. It could not reach the stars.

Sometimes in our forest we see the black and amber spider of the
mountains swinging on the end of her silver line, hung as it seems from
space. The wind blows, it swings to and fro but never breaks, and
looking up we see far overhead a light leafy twig against the blue, a
mere pencil perhaps, but with the strength of the tree in it.

Looking up into those blue depths that night, it was almost as if this
little place were for the moment swinging loose, hung upon nothing, for
hardly could its thread reach to the constant stars. Not but that it had
many friends who would rally round it if they knew it was in need; but
it was the Lord of all friends with whom we had to do. If we failed to
get access to Him and to hold on without appeal to earth, we had
completely failed.

Suddenly the word of the tempter was answered. He who hung the earth
upon nothing was the God of this little fraction of it. To Him our line
was fastened. Tree of Igdrasil, rather, and for ever, Tree of Life, from
eternity to eternity the same. And once more ashamed, fear fled. It is
safe to be hung upon nothing, safe to do anything, be anywhere, be
anything with such a God.
# 27. To Be Servants of All

On December 1, 1920, two of our children were set apart to be, the Lord
opening the way, medical missionaries, servants of all. They had prayed
over the matter, and were clear in their desire, and we wanted the hour
to be a marked one in their lives, so all the family gathered in the
Room of Praise, and standing before the two hundred and fifty, their
older and younger sisters and brothers, with those of us to whom they
are own dear children, standing round about them, they gave themselves
and we gave them to be verily servants of all.

Then we read the passage from the Gospel 'Servant of all.' 'For even the
Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give
His life a ransom for many.'

On a low table beside us facing the company of children, stood, looking
round with puzzled but approving eyes, the two-year-old boy whose name
means Great Joy. The Indian sign of service is to touch the feet, and we
are very Indian here. So the two girls touched the little feet, in sign
that these words were indeed their life's motto. And then we prayed for
the grace of the Lord to bring them into effect. That afternoon they
began to learn Latin.

A few days passed and several others, half fearing, half hoping, asked
to be allowed to join the class, and in a while we shall know to what
kind of service they are called. But the reason I have told of this
(which otherwise could have hardly had place in a book of this book's
purpose) is that the future cost of this class is in part already met.

All the girls, teaching sisters, nursing sisters, and children, learn
the kind of basket work known as American Indian, but our Dohnavur work
is gradually growing into something distinctive. This work is done in
those odd half-hours which even the busiest life must have, and which so
often slip off unregarded. Intervals of convalescence are used too, and
indeed any spare time, or 'own time' the girls have, as it is their gift
to the work. And now they want to use the proceeds to help in the
medical education of any who are to be medicals. It seems a happy plan.
Each then will have a share in the service of healing so much needed in
this land. It will be the gift of them all to India, and to India's
Lord. [There were delays, and finally the girls working on the medical
side were trained here. So the gathered money of the years, over £1,000,
has been used to build the children's wards in the Place of Heavenly
Healing. See *Gold Cord* (Chapters xl.-xlii.) for story of the
development of the medical work.]
# 28. The Bare Fact

The day is drenched in Thee;\
 In little exquisite surprises\
 Bubbling deliciousness of Thee arises\
 From sudden places,\
 Under the common traces\
 Of my most lethargied and 'customed paces.

We have lifted the words from the human to the Divine plane, and surely
even the staidest reader will forgive us this last bright excursion into
the realm forbidden in a book that touches accounts. For the lovely
words are true. Our common traces and accustomed paces are all glad with
nothing less than that. 'It is like watching an Invisible Accountant at
work,' said the one in whose care these matters are now, as she balanced
the year's accounts. And yet all through I have been trying to keep to
the strictly prosaic, trying to make this little book as nearly proper a
'Report' as possible. The word sounds dull, so I have honestly tried to
be dull, for it is generally understood that words that touch money
should be stripped and peeled and iced if possible.

We have come now to the year's end and so to the last of these facts of
finance, and I find it hard to tell it severely. It seems to ask for its
setting of mountains and bright morning sunshine, and canna beds in
crimson flower, and a rose garden waking in roses, and little eager,
noisy boys running in and out of it. But here is the bare fact:

*Nov*. 27, 1920. Felt great need of large play-room and class-room for
boys. Early morning asked with Helen for what will be needed. Stepped it
out. Reckoned about £300 would be required. Asked for it.

*Nov*. 28. Ground soft (after rain) a man to spare, dug foundations.

*Dec*. 17. See Nov. 27. L300 from E., who 'would like it used for boys.'

*Dec*. 18. Began the new room.

Up till November 26 we had not realized this room to be a necessity.
Lessons were going on in nurseries, and all seemed well; but we noticed
that those who taught were getting too tired, and knew it must be the
little rooms which even with open windows can get stuffy, and boys seem
to need a good deal of space. So that morning we stood on one of the
last empty places of the last unused corner of the square set apart for
the boys' compound, and we asked, as the note says, for 'about £300.'
The cheque has been cashed and I cannot look up the date; but mails take
just three weeks to reach us from England now, and so it must have been
sent off either on or close upon November 27, the date of that prayer in
the dawn.

We have finished our story of supplies. The year just closed (1920),
whose accounts are on another page, has brought us gifts from givers
scattered over the face of the earth; and some are very poor, and none
can give without feeling it. The giver of November 27 does house-work
day after day to save expenses and to make it possible to give-what does
that not mean of the costlier kind of love? We look at the receipt foil
again: 'And the King shall say…Inasmuch.'

Let it not be forgotten that there have been trials of faith and may be
again (so will not each reader for a moment pray that when they come we
may be strong in the Lord?). And let all we have written be regarded as
what indeed it is, a humble, grateful word of witness to Him in whom our
days are 'drenched', as the little flowers of grass are drenched at this
season in the white dews of early harvest, that cloud of dew in the heat
that refreshes the plant that has stood in the sun all day.
# 29. Nor Scrip

'No sorrow, no pain, no death, no collection. It sounds too good to be
true,' and yet all the time in our Gospel these words are written, 'When
I sent you without purse or scrip, lacked ye anything? And they said,
Nothing.' It was interesting to find from Deissmann that *scrip* means
something connected in the Indian mind with the very idea of holiness,
*begging*.

For a Greek inscription, he tells us, of the Roman period has been
discovered in Syria, in which a slave of the Syrian Goddess speaks of
the begging expeditions undertaken for 'The Lady'. This heathen apostle
who speaks of himself as 'sent by the lady' tells how each of his
journeys brought in seventy bags (the same word as that used here and
translated scrip)-not bags filled with provisions and taken on the
journey, but a beggar's collecting bag.

Our Lord has many ways of working. The only thing that can matter is to
be obedient to what, so far as we know His will, is His word for us, and
to keep to it till He directs otherwise. Surely in obedience there is
strength and courage and the blessing of a quiet mind, and, with all our
brethren who are walking on this road, we would look up with grateful
hearts and say when He asks us, 'Lacked ye anything?' 'Nothing, our dear
Master, nothing,' and tell all who listen, 'There failed not aught of
any good thing which the Lord had spoken. All came to pass.'

Yes, all. Far back in memory is one little fenced-in space. The children
had begun to come. After three years of vain search for a way to save
them, the way was shown, and the first babies came. There was great joy
in receiving them, but one day a visitor talked much about the future,
the impossibility of providing for so many little girls grown up, and
little girls grow up with astonishing speed. As I listened the years
seemed to rush upon me, and frightened me.

For I could not controvert a single thing she said. The ways of India
and the state of the Indian Church were (and are) exactly what she said
they were. The difficulties ahead were (and are) as serious, as
insurmountable. 'Impossible, impossible. You are undertaking an
impossibility,' she kept saying, till at last the word wrote itself
across the sky, and the mountains, and the green trees. Everywhere I
looked I saw it.

At that time there was very little money, and just then the Evangelistic
Band which was in full work needed all that was coming in. And a new
baby came.

But with that new baby came a little sum apart, something evidently
definitely meant to start its small career, and, being very much
consoled, I asked that something henceforth might always come with new
babies, as an earnest that all the need, not only for provision, but for
guidance in the difficult future, and deliverance from perils and fears,
would be met in full. And it has been so. Sometimes the sum is large,
oftener small, but large or small we take it as our Father's assurance
that the little new child is His now, His care, adopted into His family.

Times without number, so often that we did not, for we could not, record
them, enough came just when required for unexpected expenses, connected
with the deliverance of children, for preaching expeditions and the
needs of enquirers and converts, as well as for those unforeseeable
expenses which spring up, like cheerful plants sure of their welcome, in
the fields of a new work. Frequent and delightful surprises of this kind
of provision (for in one sense it never loses the delights of a
surprise) compel the most unwilling to believe that something more than
chance and coincidence explain such happy happenings. Someone unseen but
intimately concerned is in command, 'must be,' as a Brahman high
official said yesterday as he walked round, 'for otherwise how could all
continue so to be?'

How indeed? And far more we feel it to be so when we consider those
other gifts, the human blessed gifts of colleagues, Indian and English.
What a story theirs would make! It is hard to refrain from it, and
reading through the proofs of this poor little fragment of one, and not
the greatest, of our experiences, I feel it is indeed merest fragment of
fragments.

But I remember our forest and am encouraged. There, where all manner of
coloured stones rejoice us, we find joy in that smallest thing, the
little inconspicuous fragment of crystal, as it catches the dawn or
sparkles up to the moon walking in brightness.

So we let our fragment go, to be thankful unto Him and to speak good of
His Name.
# Note

There is no separate entry labelled 'Evangelistic' because we take it
that every entry represents the making of a road upon which the word of
the Lord may run and be glorified. The work is nothing if not
evangelistic through and through.

The accounts given in pounds are identical with those in rupees, taking
the pound as worth fifteen rupees, the rate before the war. To avoid
perplexity (for the rate is perpetually changing) this has been the plan
all through. [This was written in 1921; the exchange now (1932) is much
lower.] But to see the wonder of these accounts it is needful to
remember that about three thousand rupees was what we then required a
month, and that no one who sent to our help knew what any other was
sending, that sometimes to make up this three thousand, £200 was enough,
while sometimes over £400 was needed because of loss on exchange, and
that yet the right amount (as an average) came all through 1919, while
in 1920 when exchange was at its worst it still continued to come and at
the end we had a balance, the 'baskets, over and above.'

Could the kindest, most far-seeing financier have so adjusted matters
that (for the most part small) gifts from several thousand people, sent
to us from many different countries, should be according to the measure
of the need, whether greater or less, caused by the fluctuations of
exchange in India? Can any wonder that we trust our Heavenly Financier
and feet safe in His hands?

The story already told explains the previous page. A few words will put
those unaccustomed to diagrams on the track. When the thin line rises
above the thick line there was a balance called in the story 'Baskets.'
When the thick line rises above the thin, the expenses were greater than
the gifts of that year but were met by the balance from previous years;
in other words, we drew on the Baskets. When the thin line again rises
above the thick the Baskets were refilled. The thick line therefore
expresses the needs of the work, and the thin their supply, and the only
explanation of their adjustment through these years is to be found in
Phil. 5:19.

Over and above these gifts for general expenses, including building, we
have the nucleus of a fund called Comforts, made up in part from the
Baskets, to provide things honest for worn-out workers. As no Dohnavur
worker has 'pay' it will be recognised that the thought of these gifts
is Comfort indeed to those responsible for the conduct of the work.

Finally, remembering once more that never to man or woman on earth were
our needs or even desires made known, and that there is no promise for
the continuance of any sum mentioned in this book except the legacy of
£200 a year (which when exchange was as its worst realized less than
£100, and in purchasing value less than £40), and yet that not once have
we lacked any good thing, the word of our hearts can only be this, Who
is like unto the Lord our God that hath His dwelling so high, and yet
humbleth Himself to behold the things that are in heaven and earth?

To save givers trouble, those who take meetings for Dohnavur gladly
receive and forward anything given; but there is no collection at any
meeting. We gratefully use whatever is sent to us; but we ask all to
refrain from asking for gifts, and we trust them to see to it that no
money is drawn for us by means of entertainments. Is it needful to
entertain God's friends in order to get them to give to Him?

Gifts may be sent direct to us:-Dohnavur, Tinnevelly District, S. India,
by draft, cheque or money order, or to any of the friends of the work
who act as Hon. Secretaries in Ireland, Scotland, Australia, New
Zealand, Canada, South Africa and the United States of America.

The name and address of any of these friends will be sent on application
either to the General Secretary for England:

Miss O. Gibson,

4, Alan Road,

Wimbledon,

London, S.W. 19,

or to:

The Secretary, Dohnavur,

Tinnevelly District,

S. India.

Where legacies are concerned Miss O. Gibson (address as above) acts as
Hon. Treasurer.

The Dohnavur Books (see following page) are obtainable from any of the
above, also through booksellers in any part of the world.

\

**'I BELIEVE… I BELONG'**

The words hung on Bishop Moule's study walls many years ago. They often
come to us with comforting force. All fellowships, all loyalties meet
there.

For the sake of some who are interested in such matters we have been
asked to say from what the children are delivered and how we work.

The children: we have told in other writings what we can about their
peril. In a letter to *The Times*, Sir Valentine Chirol has thus
described them as he lately saw them: 'Between (the worshippers) flit
about laughing bright-eyed little girls, the daughters of the temple,
still unconscious of the life of the temple to which they have been
dedicated from their birth.' Should any require more explicit
information they will find it in Pierre Loti's *India*; but will those
who can bring themselves to read that description (so un-English in its
unreserve), of the dance of the Bayadere, remember that the 'delicate
and glittering butterfly' tamed to the will of her captors, was captured
when she was a babe in arms or a tiny innocent child. And let the reader
imagine if he can what it means to dare to lay hands upon such a one,
fated, doomed, trained to life in that gilded cage. We require no usual
easy sympathy and prayer, but the prayers of men and women whose hearts
are *scarred* by the burning grief of it.

But the less said (in print) the better. The children, many of them of
gentle birth and most delicate refinement of feeling, are growing up as
other children, alert, sensitive to every wind that blows. And certain
words, blown across the seas, howsoever kindly meant, can be as the
*vādai* of South India, that cutting north-east wind that shrivels
growing plants.

The boys, for whom a separate work is beginning, are wanted by three
sets of people, the Temple authorities, dramatic companies, Muhammadan.
Of this matter we do not feel free to say more at present, but we
earnestly ask for co-operation in prayer that these little lads may be
found. [See *Brothers of the Lotus Buds*. Godfrey Webb-Peploe.]

Finally, to revert to ourselves again, we are all of one mind in an
house as regards the Bible, very Word of Very God, and no one would be
at home with us who was not happy in the simplest form of evangelical
religion. It has sometimes seemed to us that perhaps one reason why we
were set here was that God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ of whom
the whole family in heaven and earth is named, took pleasure in showing
that, unaffected by the whirl of talk, unconfused by findings of
committees to consider unity, it was possible simply and happily to do
the things so much discussed and be one with His lovers everywhere.
Surely all who love meet in essentials. There are places where questions
and differences fall off. In those places, heavenly places in Christ
Jesus our Lord, we meet and move, and know no other, nor wish to know
them. Nor do our children. To them 'our unhappy divisions' are not even
names.

The work then and we ourselves belong to the people of the family. The
children belong to them. To the love of that dear family we commit them,
in the love of the Lord.

And the future? There may be no future. Perhaps He will come for whom we
are all looking. But should there be a future, what can we do but train
our children in truth and in love, and trust Him to open the way before
them? We never deceive ourselves by imagining it will be easy for them.
We are trying to prepare them to endure hardness, every kind of
hardness, as good soldiers.

All round us there is work to be done; the opportunities know no
boundaries but those set by our strength and the means at our command.
Large communities of Moslems, and Hindu towns unaffected by the Gospel
or hardened in resistance by their contact with it, stand on three sides
of us. Near our forest is a Hindu shrine to which pilgrims go. When the
way opens we hope to do something that will reach many from far away.
