# Foreword to First Edition by the Bishop of Durham

I have just completed the perusal of the proof‐sheets of 'PONNAMAL.' What shall 
I say to commend the book to others? Simply this: Read it,and give God thanks 
for it; and read it again, and often. It will be a friend and helper to your 
faith, a kindling fire to your missionary thoughts,prayers, and efforts, a 
window through which you will see 'the real India' as it is not often seen, and 
a picture, wonderful and beautiful, of the life of the Lord lived in His 
missionary servants, and in the Indian sisters whom they have brought into His 
all‐loving power and keeping.

The interests of the book are manifold. To those who know the writer's Lotus 
Buds it will be very moving to see, as it were from within,something of the most 
pathetic and noble rescue‐work in the world. A hundred details of missionary 
life will assume a new reality and vividness. And,above all, the MASTER of the 
field, of the labourers, of the harvest, will be 'glorified in His saint,' this 
dear saint with the'steadfast eyes and the brow of peace,' in whom so 
wonderfully, in life and in that suffering death, He showed Himself alive for 
evermore.

# The Girl Ponnamal
A girl stood alone in the dark, listening. No one moved about her; the old 
mother‐in‐law who slept near by breathed steadily, she would not waken yet 
awhile. The girl drew back the heavy iron bolts of the door and slipped out into 
the night.

Out there, in the soft warm air, with the white stars looking down on her with 
only pity in their eyes, she stopped. She knew the thing she purposed doing was 
unreasonable and hopelessly wrong; but she was too desperate with loneliness to 
care. Life since her husband had died had been too hard to live. A widow's life 
in India-God only knows how hard it can be made-she could bear it no longer; she 
had crept out now to end it, as so many girls have ended it. The well was near; 
it seemed to draw her to itself. And yet she waited; and the quiet stars soothed 
her, and the soft night airs did their healing work.

Then as she stood came the memory of something she had read about an Indian 
widow in Western India who was working a great work for her country. A widow, 
and yet of use to India: the thing had been; could be, perhaps, again. Perhaps 
there was something left for her to do. She would not end all hope of it 
tonight.

So she stole back again and lay down on her mat, and clasped closer the little 
child, her only child, whom she had all but left for ever in her mad misery, and 
lying with unsleeping eyes thought many thoughts till dawn.

This was Ponnamal: and thus was the awakening of a spirit that was to travel far 
in the fields of joyful adventure.

She was born in August, 1875, that great year for India when Edward, Prince of 
Wales, came and stayed in simple fashion with the Collector of the district in 
which her home lay, and stood to be gazed at by crowds of gratified Christians 
at the railway‐station. And because she was born in so great a year, the village 
folk told her father she would be great among women. He, good man, believed 
them, and received her with much joy, and called her Ponnamal, which means gold.

She grew to be an attractive little maid, of a soft clear colour quite unlike 
the 'black' of English imagination. And quiet eyes she had,that looked 
steadfastly out on the world; and hair that waved and curled; and delicate 
little hands that no work ever spoiled. The mother, a saint of typical Indian 
type, brought her up carefully; and when she went to school, and returned 
praised by all and very wise, the father felt she had indeed begun her life in 
an auspicious year.

At nineteen they married her, as the custom was, and too often is, with little 
knowledge of the one to whom they committed so dear a treasure; he was a 
professor in a mission college, had good pay, was of the right degree of 
relationship, and of course of the exact shade of suitable caste. And clothed in 
silken garments, and decked with pretty chains and bangles, as sweet and true as 
she was good to look upon, she left her father's house, girl of high spirit, but 
gentle as a fawn.

Of her one year of married life Ponnamal never cared to speak: it was 
disillusionment. Perhaps this was inevitable, for she was by nature spiritual, 
and he was of the earth earthy, and his pursuits apart from his college duties 
were not of an elevated character. She had no sort of kinship with him till her 
baby came, when, the Tamil being an affectionate parent, they met for the first 
time on common ground; and with the Indian woman's gracious gift of making the 
most out of little, she contented herself and was happy.

Then suddenly her husband died, and she was that most desolate of God's 
creatures in India, a widow.

At first the gloom was lightened by the kindness of her father "her mother 
having died previously", who took her home and in his simple way tried to 
comfort her. But even he could not quite rise above the sense of heavy disgrace 
and misfortune. Life seemed suddenly one long, tired perplexity.

Then pulling herself together she faced it; knew that to conquer in it she must 
be strong; felt that the sorrowful, considerate affection of her own people was 
weakening something within her. 'I wanted to learn to endure,' she told me years 
afterwards, 'and so I went to my father‐in‐law's house;' where, as all knew, she 
was wanted, because of the child whom the parents‐in‐law counted theirs, and 
because of some property now Ponnamal's, which they wished to appropriate. Of 
sympathy they knew nothing at all. Now, in real earnest, began the discipline of 
widowhood.

Ponnamal's mother and her mother before her had been women of that sweet and 
saintly type so essentially Indian, that those who know and love this land will 
recognize it without more descriptive words. The family had become Christian in 
the great‐grandmother's time; and the women seem to have been notable all the 
way down the line, which in India, with its early marriages, covers fewer years 
than one might expect. The parents‐in‐law were also Christians of standing, but 
the tenderer elements somehow had been missed when they were made. Fine folk 
they were of their sort, people of force, some wealth, and abundant worldly 
wisdom. To them the girl widow was a blot on the prosperous landscape of life, 
to be tolerated only for the sake of the child-their son's child. With the 
shrewdness of a woman of this type, the mother‐in‐law recognized in Ponnamal 
something foreign in spirit and therefore obnoxious. Her harsh voice drove the 
girl about the house from morning till evening; and Ponnamal, who was eager to 
help, was treated as an unwilling drudge, to be scolded for her good. And for 
her good did that strange girl accept it all. The stuff which makes meek nuns 
scourge themselves in secret was in her. She accepted it, and at first in peace.

But little by little she sank under it. She was not allowed to keep herself 
nice, and that wounded the self‐respect in her. Her beautiful long waves of hair 
might not be combed except with her fingers, and never might be dressed. Except 
on Sunday, when she was taken to church, she was not allowed a clean garment: 
soiled things become a widow. She was never allowed out anywhere except to 
church. In curious contradiction to this they wished Ponnamal to wear some of 
her jewels still, a quite unjewelled woman being too terrible a thing to have to 
contemplate daily. But of this Ponnamal thought little. What broke her spirit 
was the restricted life, the sense of being always wrong, always under the 
shadow of disapproval as a widow. She felt smothered. Her child, a precious 
little person called Paripuranam "Perfection", shortened to a purry sort of word 
best spelt Purripu, was hers, of course, but far more its grandmother's: so 
there was the constant fret of a divided responsibility and disputed claims. 
Sometimes she would try to lift herself above everything and triumph through 
sheer will‐power. But will‐power fails under certain forms of trial long 
continued. She would not give in, acknowledge herself defeated, and return to 
her father's house; but she slipped down. It was then the cool waters of the 
well in the courtyard called her. Did an angel lay his hand on her arm at that 
moment and draw her back? The thought that worked within her I have already 
told.

# Enlightened 

Things were so with Ponnamal when we, Mr. and Mrs. Walker and I with them, came 
to live in the old mission house of Pannaivilai, less than a mile from her home. 
The Walkers immediately began to visit the Christian houses about us; and one 
day, when visiting those particular parents‐in‐law, they saw, standing behind a 
door set ajar, a girl with hair like a dark cloud falling round her face, 
looking out at them as they sat in a front room of the house. India is a land of 
mystery. We get accustomed to mysteries, and hardly think of them as mysterious. 
But they wondered who the wild‐faced girl could be, and asked, and were told 
'the widow of our son.'

And now began those wonderful days when vital religion was preached Sunday by 
Sunday in the village church, and the place was alive with a sense of stir and a 
new brightness. Among the first to be enlightened was the girl Ponnamal. She 
listened, one of a group of women on the right‐hand side of the preacher, whose 
eyes, even as he poured out rapid sentences in complicated Tamil, saw everyone, 
took in everything. Then the Spirit who works without noise of words wrought in 
her, and her heart was refreshed in the multitude of peace.

From this time forward all things became different for Ponnamal. There was the 
same starved existence, with its cramping walls and irritating, depressing 
influences; and yet all things were made new. She went about her duties in a 
kind of triumphant serenity which not even the jarring clatter of the house 
could disturb. Her mother‐in‐law was disgusted with her; she who had devoured 
the life of her husband, what right had she to be happy? But there was one 
blessed respite, for gradually Mrs. Walker's gentleness prevailed with the old 
father‐in‐law, and he allowed Ponnamal to stay for an hour after the Sunday 
service and teach a class in Sunday‐school. It was there I saw her first.

I can see her now, a slight figure in a dark blue sari, with a group of grown‐up 
women round her; for the school included people of all ages, down to old 
grannies as ignorant as infants. Ponnamal had women who could read, so they were 
more or less intelligent; but what struck me was her power over them. There was 
something about her which was quite unusual. From that moment Ponnamal for me 
was a woman set apart.

But she was still held in stern bondage by the old parents‐in‐law, who rigidly 
limited the hours of her liberty. Once in an evil moment she went to a 
neighbour's house to comfort a poor despairing widow who had sent a message to 
her imploring her to come; they were very angry with her, and she was 
confined-coffined, I had almost written-more rigorously than ever.

But it was discipline that could not hurt her now; the sense of fret was gone. 
She learned fortitude, patience, and the secret of possessing that joy which is 
not in circumstances, and so does not depend upon them.

In those days I was immersed in the study of Tamil. But as often as I could, I 
went out with an Indian woman chiefly to listen and learn. Before long I had 
made friends with the old couple who stood like two ancient, obdurate dragons 
between Ponnamal and the fulness of life. I had seen the old father‐in‐law crush 
a butterfly against the church wall during a service; the action seemed 
symbolical of the trend of his purpose towards this, the only fragment of vivid 
human personality he had it in his power to crush; and oppressed by the thought 
of it, I tried hard to find a tender spot in the old man, and one day I found 
it. Before he was quite aware of it, he was solemnly assuring me that if I came 
on a certain afternoon which he named, Ponnamal should go out with me.

Not till sixteen years later, when Ponnamal, in the leisure of illness, was 
living her life over again, did I know that she counted that the day of her 
spiritual Jubilee, the opening of her prison door. Nor did I know of the things 
which kindly worked together toward pulling back the bars. For the Indian mind 
rarely recognizes that which ours seizes upon as the crucial thing. The real 
substance of a letter is scattered loose all over it, or dropped into a casual 
postscript, or never told at all. That which grips you in a story is there by 
the merest chance. And so it came to pass that not till she lay ill, and I, 
sitting beside her with a big volume of 'Lotus Buds' on my lap, was colouring 
the pictures for her, by way of drawing her into reminiscences connected 
therewith, did I hear the back side of that afternoon.

'After you left the house, my father‐in‐law repented his promise, and my 
mother‐in‐law upbraided him for making it. They decided that when you came they 
would say it did not happen to be convenient to allow me to go. On the afternoon 
appointed, they talked about the matter to some of their friends who chanced to 
be spending the day in the house. They said, "that Mūsal Missie" "they called 
you that because like a hare were your swift ways" "came and beguiled us into 
folly." And they told the foolishness into which you had caused them unawares to 
fall. But their friends saw the matter otherwise, and one whom they greatly 
respected for his age and wisdom said, "Where is the indignity? The Mūsal Missie 
will come in a bullock‐bandy and take the girl with due respect to the place 
whither she wishes to go; and she will with care return her at the proper time. 
What indignity to your family can there be in that?" The other men all agreed, 
and they softened towards the proposal; and all this time I was waiting behind 
the door, shaking with fear lest at the last moment they would harden again.'

But when a few minutes later I arrived, all I saw was a smiling old man and a 
smiling old woman, and a composed, though evidently eager, girl. The eagerness, 
however, was well under control; there was no hint of it in the quiet manner, 
only it looked out of her eyes; and I saw it, and met it, and loved her.

#  Loosed
Early in June, 1897, Ponnamal, her relatives by miracle agreeing, cast in her 
lot with mine; and for eight years we itinerated together, with a band of women 
and girls who gathered round us. The people called us by a name meaning a 
constellation like Orion or the Pleiades, and we often got letters addressed to 
us under this shining name. Those years lie in memory like a handful of jewels 
that sparkle as I turn them over. Why do past years sparkle so? They were full 
of ordinary things while they were being lived; they were often dusty and dull; 
but they are jewels now, many‐coloured, various; lighted with lights time cannot 
dim nor tears drown.

Outwardly our life was, I suppose, quite normal. We were an itinerating band, 
furnished with a flag made of folds of black, red, white, and yellow sateen, a 
most useful text for an impromptu sermon; and we found Eastern musical 
instruments useful too. Being the first women's band of its kind in the 
district, we walked circumspectly. I used to feel like a cat on the top of a 
wall, the sort of wall that is plentifully set with bits of broken bottles; for 
there seemed to be no end to the occasions on which 'it was necessary to be 
careful.' But we had excellent times notwithstanding, and our own little private 
springs of mirth never ran dry. Ponnamal soon recovered from the cowing effect 
of her parents‐in‐law, and proved herself a delightful companion; it was good to 
see the timid look passing from her, as she began to realize her liberty. And 
our manner of life was ideal: we had one thing to do and one only; there could 
be no perplexities as to which was the duty of the hour-there was only one 
possible duty.

Much of our time we spent in scouring the country round our different camping 
places. Off we would go in the early morning, walking, or by bullock‐cart, as 
many of us as could get in, packed under its curved mat roof. Stuffiness, 
weariness, that appalling sensation of almost sea‐sickness which never forgets 
to afflict those naturally inclined thereto, all these disagreeables have faded, 
and one only remembers the loveliness of the early lights on palm, and water, 
and emerald sheet of rice‐field; the songs by which we refreshed ourselves as we 
tumbled along in the heat; the pause outside the village we were to enter; the 
swift upward call for an open door; the entrance, all of us watching eagerly for 
signs of a welcome anywhere-for this was pioneer work, not work in ground 
prepared, and in scores of the places to which we went no white woman had ever 
been seen before.

Sometimes we would get out at the entrance of the village and walk on till we 
saw a friendly face-and we almost always found one. We usually separated then, 
and went two and two, and won our way past the men who would be sauntering in 
the front courtyard, and so penetrated to the women's rooms; or if that proved 
impracticable, we held an open‐air meeting somewhere; or sat down wherever we 
could, and waited till someone came to talk, for we found-at festivals, for 
example-that if we waited in some quiet by‐street, sitting apparently 
unconcerned, Indian guru‐fashion, on a deserted verandah, or under a tree, that 
one by one people discovered us, and came and squatted down beside us and asked 
questions. We grew more and more to use this way of approach; it seemed to suit 
the temper of the people, and it led furthest in.

Then home before the heat grew too intolerable; and then after breakfast, 
through the hottest time, we had what would now be described as a Study Circle.

Not that we had ever heard the word, a convenient later invention; but the thing 
itself was our habit; and with something of the spirit with which Lady 
Burne‐Jones tells us her husband and his friend William Morris sat down to 
search into the lightest word of their poet, by way of preparation for the 
making of the beautiful Kelmscott Press Chaucer, we, together with the other 
members of the women's band, turned to the well‐known pages of our Classic, and 
searched them through and through for that without which our work would have 
been vain. Often Ponnamal took notes; and those notes were copied by Tamil Bible 
Students elsewhere, and used to reappear, to our interest and sometimes 
amusement, in unexpected places. In the last year of her life her comfort was 
for me to sit with her and read now without note or comment from that beloved 
Book. In this way we read the Psalms, and Gospels, and those parts of the 
Epistles which lead into quiet meadows, lingering over and returning again and 
again to the dear and long familiar words, in which she found strong 
consolation.

The afternoons and evenings of those years were spent much as the mornings, 
except that we often joined the other side of the house in its avocations, and 
when missions to Christians were the order of the day took our share in them. 
Sometimes we all went street‐preaching together, with a baby organ by way of 
attraction; and Ponnamal, who had developed a gift of fine and forceful speech, 
and could hold a turbulent open‐air meeting in a big busy market as easily as 
the decorous assembly settled in tidy rows in prayer‐room or village church, was 
an immense help always. Coming home, especially if the afternoon had been in 
some irresponsive village and we were feeling low, we used to make a point of 
singing the happiest things we knew.

Once, for a period which seemed ages long, we were shut out of the homes of the 
people, because some of them had believed our report. When we went to the 
villages where this had happened, we were pelted with ashes and rotten garlands 
from the necks of the idols.

One day a great crowd drew round us, and shouted its sentiments and made a most 
unholy racket. We stood under a burning sun till we were too tired to stand any 
longer; then, as there was nothing else to be done, we knelt down in the middle 
of the rabble and prayed for it, after which it let us go. Once we were 
tom‐tomed out of a village, accompanied by all the ragamuffins of the place-a 
new experience for Ponnamal; but she walked out of that village, I remember, 
with the utmost dignity, in nowise disturbed thereby. To those to whom such 
episodes sound rather extraordinary, and to whom the militant attitude is all 
wrong, I can only say that with the best intentions, as I think ours were, to 
live a peaceable life, we were never able to discover a way by which the 
captives of the devil could be delivered without offending that person. When 
doors lie open year after year, it only means that nothing vital has been done 
behind them. But open doors are such nice things that we were at first much 
troubled when they shut; it was then we comforted ourselves with song. And as 
the ultimate outcome of opposition was usually the emancipation of someone 
elsewhere, we learned not to be moved from our purpose by talk about the 
unwisdom of shutting doors.

But while we were thus shut out, it was a real trouble to us to; feel ourselves 
anathema; for we knew the people inside so well, and so thoroughly understood 
the bitterness of things to them, that we could not help sympathizing with them. 
'If India were as Japan is, how different it would be!' I used to say ruefully, 
after a battering of spirit in some vociferous village. There they are not 
compelled by any idiotic social code to turn believing members out of their 
community, and fall upon those who only want to help them. And one day I looked 
at a great spider's web several feet in diameter, and saw the mighty Caste 
system of India. At the outer edges floated almost freely long light threads 
that caught the morning sun and waved responsively to the morning airs. But 
nearer to the centre of the web the lines were drawn close-no wandering here; 
and right in the heart of it crouched the creature who ruled it all. A spider in 
India can be quite terrific; so can that be which holds the threads of a web 
woven in the far beginning.

# To Whatever Utmost Distance
The story this chapter tells has been told in brief elsewhere; but it is 
essentially Ponnamal's, and cannot be left out of this record of her life.

We had all been camping out in an interesting village, where some of the most 
riotous of the opposing Hindus had been converted; and we were full of happiness 
as we started for home. With us, in our bullock‐cart, was a young wife whose 
husband wanted us to take her into our Starry Band for awhile, in order that she 
might return home able to help others. She was a silly little thing, not his 
equal in any way, and untouched by his ideal; but in those good days we were 
rich in hope, and we took her. As we rumbled along the road, the husband, who 
had been talking to the Walkers, who were in the bandy ahead of us, now dropped 
back to ours, and asked his wife to give him her jewels "the word covers all the 
gold and silver ornaments worn by women in South India", which he did not think 
became anyone who wanted to live the kind of life he desired for her. She 
obeyed; there was nothing in her act but just obedience, for her heart desired 
otherwise; but I saw an expression of intense interest in Ponnamal's face, and 
she told me that the evening before, while she was speaking in the open air, she 
had overheard a child say to her mother that when she grew up she would join 
that band and wear jewels 'like that sister'"herself". The words had smitten 
Ponnamal. She felt this was the last impression she wished to leave upon 
anyone's mind; she had gone to her Lord about it, and the answer that seemed to 
come to her was this: 'Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of the 
Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.' She did not argue as to the 
meaning of these words. She saw in the flash of a moment herself, unjewelled, a 
marked woman among her own people; an eyesore, an offence. But-and the thought 
overwhelmed her with the joy in it-not so to the Lord her God.

When we went home she took off her jewels. How minute, how inoffensive the words 
appear now, set down in one short sentence! But every syllable in them burned 
for us then. Are your hearts set upon righteousness, O ye congregation? and do 
ye judge the thing that is right, O ye sons of men? The answer to that question 
will be given otherwhere.

In South India, a woman's life down to its merest detail is governed by the law 
universal, called custom. Her husband, however, has power to override custom. 
The action therefore of the wife provoked no comment, beyond a passing wonder; 
besides which it was recognized by a sure instinct that the thing would not 
proceed far in that direction: when the time came to marry the daughters they 
would be suitably jewelled. Ponnamal's case was different. If she had taken off 
her jewels at the time of her husband's death, that would have been all right, 
because according to custom; but she had done this thing out of sheer love to 
her Lord. It broke the conventions of life: it would lead who knew how far? It 
was therefore unnatural, disgraceful; worse, it was pharisaical. 'Be not 
righteous overmuch,' was the word flung at Ponnamal.

Then what was to be, happened. A few-how few! but still to the startled and 
indignant eyes that watched, it was most ominous-'inebriated with Divine love,' 
eager to forsake and defy the spirit of the world, stript themselves of every 
weight that they might the less laden run the race that lay before them; and 
they either returned their jewels to their families, or, if free to do so, gave 
them to the C.M.S. for China. One who had a long struggle with herself told me 
that she had never gone to sleep at night without her hand on the gold chain she 
wore round her neck. 'If I had loved my Saviour more, I should have loved my 
jewels less,' she said. The last to do this difficult thing had a hard time 
afterwards: she was taken from the band by her people, and suffered many things. 
None of us touched on the subject except when privately asked what we felt about 
it; but it was impossible to speak without seeming to allude to it.

How vividly, as I write, comes back to me an afternoon meeting in a church in 
the country. The place was full, for we were in the middle of a mission; and to 
the Indian Christian, meetings are a sweet delight. Before me sat rows of women, 
and the village being rich, their ears, cut into large loops, were laden with 
ornaments. But to me it had been given that day to look upon Christ Crucified. I 
could only speak of Calvary. Far, far from me then was any thought of the 
women's golden toys: all eternity was round me, and that common little building 
was the vestibule thereof. Then, as I spoke, I saw a woman rise. She told me 
afterwards that she could not bear it. Time, and the scorn of time, and its poor 
estimates, how trivial all appeared! 'I saw Him,' she said, 'naked of this 
world's glory, stript to the uttermost; and I went and made an ash‐heap of my 
pride.'

Then the word flew round that we three, the Walkers and I, especially that I, 
preached heresy; and one whom we all respected, a most devout and dear Tamil 
fellow‐worker, had an alarming dream in which he perceived me wrecking the Tamil 
church; and he implored Mr. Walker to allow him to deal with me. So on the floor 
at the entrance to the tent we, Mr. Walker, he, and I, sat for two serious 
hours, and he talked. We ended where we began, but we ended in affection, which 
was a great relief to me. Still, he was disappointed; for we could not un‐see 
what we had seen, nor deny the change that obedience had wrought in the lives of 
those who had obeyed, counting it joy to have something more to offer. We left 
it, saying only to any who pressed us, 'If ye be otherwise minded, God, if you 
truly desire it, will reveal even this unto you.'

Mr. Walker's contribution to the weighty subject under dispute was 
characteristic. It was not in its outward form a thing that very closely touched 
an Englishman; but in essence it did, and he pierced through to the heart of it: 
'Let's have liberty,' he said; 'people are always so anxious to circumcise 
Titus'-and he would not have Titus circumcised. Later, as the feeling grew more 
and more determined that at all costs Titus must be circumcised, he took the 
matter up more definitely; and as usual, careless of his own reputation for 
narrow‐mindedness or what not, spoke out his thoughts. Liberty, like duty, was 
one of his golden words; and another-and it was this he championed now-was 
obedience.

One day, soon after the last of the band had taken off her jewels, Ponnamal's 
parents‐in‐law sent for her and said, 'Do you know what you have done? You have 
closed the heart of the Hindus. Till now those who according to ordinary custom 
would have looked coldly upon you, have received you in a remarkable manner, for 
to their eyes you appeared a person of consequence.' This was a new view of 
matters to Ponnamal, who, till she had joined the band, knew little of Hindus of 
the exclusive castes; however, she had an answer ready. 'I told them,' she said, 
'that I thought the Holy Spirit of God was strong enough to make a way for me, 
even without the help of my jewels.' And to her surprise she found the 
difficulty did not exist. To the Hindu, what he calls piety is an attractive 
thing; piety includes and indeed chiefly consists in a renunciation of the good 
things of this life. Anything, therefore, which leans to this commends itself to 
him. Also, of course, an unjewelled widow was quite natural to him. So 
Ponnamal's undecorated person was no offence to the Hindus. 'There are no 
boundaries set to her devotion,' they remarked, and thought no more about it, 
but respected her the more.

The furor passed; the violence of it, so absurdly out of proportion to its 
importance-at least according to Western thought-diminished at length; but it 
left its mark. The women who had braved the storm had made a new discovery: they 
were no more thereafter mere biscuits in a biscuit‐box, cut to correct pattern, 
fitted in rows, each the duplicate of the other; they had found a new thing, 
even their individuality; and in finding it they had gained in courage and in 
character. Things impossible before were now undertaken without a thought; they 
were free from a thousand trammels that before had entangled their feet with 
invisible threads. And going deeper, those who for love of the Crucified had 
counted all things loss and vanity, loved Him now with a new love, rejoiced with 
a new joy. Is there any limit to what God is prepared to do for the one who 
loves His Son well enough to meet His lightest wish? 'After these 
things'-renunciation of temporal gain-the word of the Lord came unto Abraham in 
a vision, saying, 'Fear not, I am thy shield and thy exceeding great reward.' 
After these things-not dissimilar-the word was the same.

Among Ponnamal's notebooks is one dealing with these years of camp‐life; and 
sitting on the window‐sill of the nursery yesterday, her daughter and dear 
little legacy to us, read to me page after page of prayers, in Ponnamal's 
beautiful, eager Tamil: prayers written down, as probably all true recorded 
prayer has ever been, for the relief of a heart too full to contain that which 
boiled up within it. The prayer of the time we are dealing with now touched me 
most: 'Thou knowest my desire: my life does not yet appear to me as thoroughly 
controlled by Thee. My Father, look upon the holy face of Thy Beloved, and in 
those of us who have thus dedicated ourselves to Thee, work so, thoroughly that 
to whatever utmost distance Thou canst lead us, to that utmost distance for the 
glory of Thy name, we shall be led by Thee.'

Looking back after fifteen years' experience of what continued to the end to be 
a veritable reproach, she said: 'It was to me a new emancipation. A new sense of 
spiritual liberty is bound up in my mind with that experience; it affected 
everything in such an unexpected way; it set my spirit free. I could not have 
done this new work "the work for the Temple children", if it had not been for 
the new courage that came with that break with custom, and from bondage to the 
fear of man.' Truly at that time Ponnamal learned to say, 'A fig for the day's 
smile of a worm!' or for the day's frown either; and we all went on in 
quietness, and let the little flies of criticism buzz as they pleased about us. 
'Walk before Me and be thou perfect.' What a mercy it is that it does not say, 
Walk before Sarah!

It worked, too, into most convenient though lesser forms of freedom; for now the 
band could travel anywhere, unafraid. Night journeys along unfrequented roads 
had been impracticable before, and it was not always possible to travel by day. 
And when in after years the work for children was established, and a large 
company of girls, bereft of the protection the mere presence of a white man near 
by affords, was left with us alone in what was then an open compound in 
jungle‐land, the two old men of the robber caste who, according to the custom of 
the South, are subsidized to insure us from the attentions of that caste, came 
to us and said: 'We agree to continue to be your guard; but if your girls were 
as others are, jewelled, we would not do it-no, not for lacs of rupees.'

# Underland
We were in the midst of our usual life when the little Elf walked into it, 
interrupted it, and finally changed its current.

We had been for a year or so at Dohnavur, which was then Camp to us, our 
belongings being at Pannaivilai. It was a trial to leave Dohnavur, for there 
were some in the Hindu villages who were inquiring; and one in particular, who 
afterwards came out and was hypnotized and carried back in triumph, was much in 
our thoughts. But we never stayed for long anywhere in those days, being 
dedicated to the wanderer's calling; and Dohnavur was only one of our various 
headquarters while itinerating, and we had to return to Pannaivilai for another 
year's work on that side of the district.

Now there was in the Hindu village near by, as I have told before, a certain 
child who had set her heart on escaping from the life to which her mother, 
hardly understanding its purport, had allowed herself to be persuaded to devote 
her. Her father, a man of noble character, was dead; she had escaped once and 
had fled to her mother, who, to the Temple woman who followed after, gave her up 
again. To whom then could she flee? She did not know; she only knew that one 
March evening, in the twilight, something within her made her run across the 
narrow stream that divided her village from ours, and through the wood of 
rustling palmyra palms, and so to the village where a great church stood, and 
under it she paused to wait upon events. There she was found shortly afterwards, 
and next morning she was brought to us. We had only arrived the day before.

Had we not arrived, what would have happened? Who can tell? We need not try to 
imagine. We had arrived; the woman who found the child, instead of taking her 
back to her people, as she told us she would have done had no one been at hand 
to take the responsibility of her, brought her to us; and we kept her.

Thereafter for awhile all went on as before; only, as evening by evening we 
returned from work, there was a child's loving welcome, little loving arms were 
round one's neck. I remember wakening up to the knowledge that there had been a 
very empty corner somewhere in me that the work had never filled; and I 
remember, too, thanking God that it was not wrong to be comforted by the love of 
a child.

But this is Ponnamal's story, and the Elf did not become part of that till 
later; so that some years must be imagined of steady work as before-on 
Ponnamal's part without any inkling of that to which we were being drawn; on 
mine, very little.

And yet underlying all our work thenceforth was a search, begun almost 
unconsciously, for the covered facts connected with a traffic of which now for 
the first time I had become thoroughly aware. The child told me many things. 
These things burned in me. I told them to Ponnamal. She sympathized, but did not 
see what we could do. Neither indeed did I. All efforts that year to save 
children failed. Nothing I could devise, nothing Ponnamal could do, could effect 
the deliverance of a single little girl.

Then the thought came to me definitely to try to find out the conditions which 
govern this traffic in child‐life. Our constant itineration was a help in this; 
it brought us into contact with many people, and perpetually led to new 
experiences. But some of the things we did together we never talked about; for I 
was feeling my way in those days, and felt that talk even to those nearest me 
would be premature. Sometimes we drifted quietly into the midst of some big 
festival at night, and lost ourselves in that place about which so many who live 
on its edge know nothing at all. Often I used to wonder at the way it received 
us; and one evening the talk about me was so different from the kind everywhere 
reserved for people of our race, that I began to feel I had slipped unawares 
into something quite new. It was Alice in Wonderland over again, only it was a 
different wonderland. Alice in Underland would have to be its name; and was I 
Alice, or who? Ponnamal was herself, however, which was reassuring; and we sat 
and talked to the people and had some food. Presently some newcomers arrived; 
the place was a caravanserai, and the time was late evening. It was moonlight, 
and we were on the shadowy side of the wide mud verandah. As the new travellers 
came in and passed us, they made to me the ordinary sign of salutation to a 
Brahman woman, and Ponnamal beside me laughed softly; and I understood, and knew 
that for the first time I was inside India, the real India.

After that experience, I found it well to go there as often as possible. It was 
thus, while far inside this underland, deep in the recesses of some great temple 
court with its towering walls all round, or sitting among the friendly 
garland‐makers as they strung jessamine and oleander into wreaths and 
flower‐balls for the gods, I heard much unknown to me before, and gradually to 
me it was given to see into the heart of the matter, and to know how the laws 
were being evaded and the children polluted. Words fall from such discoveries: 
they ask for deeds, not words. But as I stood in spirit before this new 
knowledge, which like some great shape limb by limb took visible substance 
before us, I ate ashes as it were bread, and mingled my drink with weeping. 
Ponnamal ate of those ashes too; but that which even then was calling to me with 
such urgent voice that I thought those very near must hear, seemed as a vain 
dream to her. She would have gone with me to the mouth of hell, and did, when I 
had to go there; but that we should ever be able to snatch children from that 
open mouth was something too good to be true. We had yet to learn that nothing 
is too good to be true.

# The Time Appointed
It was early January, 1904, and we had now settled in Dohnavur. The Walkers were 
in England, and we were more occupied than ever, as their absence weighted every 
anxiety; for by that time many converts had come out, and whoso would know 
anxiety let him take charge of converts. Among the most serious of the time was 
the care of a lad of eighteen, who could not be sent elsewhere, and who sickened 
with pneumonia soon after his arrival. If he had died before his people could be 
summoned, there was reason to anticipate trouble; a Court case, probably, for 
the circumstances leaned that way. Nursing him meant sitting up at night, as 
there was nobody who could be depended upon to change the poultices. I left him 
on the morning after the crisis had been safely passed, and lay down for an 
hour, leaving him, as I trusted, in safe hands. Before the hour was up, a 
messenger came post‐haste: 'He is going to die! So says the village barber. All 
his three pulses are talking together! He will shortly have convulsions and 
die.' Down I fled to the converts' quarters, found the boy had struggled out, 
called for the village barber, and was now fairly committed to fulfil that 
gentleman's predictions. He lived, remarking in English when he emerged from 
another crisis, 'I am too much very tired;' so that anxiety passed; only to open 
into another, beside which the first was as nothing.

Ponnamal meanwhile kept all going peacefully on the girls' side, and when we 
could we went out as before.

While things were so, unknown even to Ponnamal, who had now dropped any idea of 
saving the Temple children, feeling the utter hopelessness of attempts in that 
direction, thoughts about them were rising round me like a sea of waters that 
rose above my head. I could not push those thoughts away; I saw the perishing 
children, I heard them call. How to do anything vital I knew not; I only knew I 
had to try again.

Within a week I had the first Temple baby we were ever able to get. Ponnamal 
welcomed it; but her eyes were holden, as indeed mine were. We did not know we 
were on the edge of new things, and must soon stop our usual work, and, turning 
from the familiar ways, carve a path through the jungle, where all the way along 
sharp thorns would be ready to stab us as we passed-a path ending in what? New 
responsibilities, graver, heavier, than any we had ever undertaken. No, not 
ending there-ending in joy, blessed eternal overflowings, inexhaustible wells of 
delight.

Shortly afterwards we heard of another child. Here again it was possible to get 
her; she was in a Temple house, for her father had dedicated her in order to 
acquire merit, but the conditions were such that we were able to redeem her. 
This meant refunding the expenses incurred in connection with her dedication. We 
paid them, and she came.

Then Ponnamal was troubled. The whole thing was so new, so strange in its 
accompanying circumstances, that she could not feel in sympathy with it. Nor, I 
was sure, would the friends at home, with whom I was accustomed to talk over all 
new thoughts before committing them to action. And so it proved when the first 
letters came; for I read the doubt through all the kindness. This new adventure 
was assuredly to go unspeeded, and I could not wonder.

For that curious and uncomfortable faculty which not only invites but compels 
one to see an action from every possible point of view, and to appreciate and to 
sympathize in a quite uncanny fashion with what its detractors are going to say, 
was quick in me; I could have sat down and written the letters that were written 
to me by almost everyone who wrote at all. Letters which looked at things 
otherwise shine in my grateful memory. So I spent some days, difficult to the 
spirit which saw its course open before it and knew it had to travel therein, 
speeded or unspeeded.

But Ponnamal-I had never before for one moment been out of touch with her. I 
prayed for a sign from heaven to show her what had been shown to me, and it was 
given. Gideon's fleece we called it ever after. From that day Ponnamal never 
looked back. Valiant to the last, my comfort, my inspiration in darkest hours, 
she said as she left in what, despite the dear presence of comrades about me, 
felt for the moment a desolation, 'I see into the future'-and her eyes lit up 
with a wonderful glorious fire-'I see God with you. This work is of Him, 
whatever man may say. He has never failed it: He will not fail it.'

# Why Mens Honours Woman?

The following bears upon my tale, though for the moment the critical reader may 
doubt it. It is a cutting from the Madras Mail, the South Indian newspaper which 
we take at Dohnavur.

'Mr. R. M. D. writes to the Times of India as follows: "My purpos for writin on 
you this, is to inform your many English Brothers not to give honor and devotion 
to your ladys because they will in the end becum proud and then they will want 
vote. 2 or 3 thing happen at Victory Garden to‐morrow and then I all of sudden 
made up my brain to write you immediate. There was many Englis womans and when 
mans are sitting on the bench, and womans come, man stand, and give their sit to 
woman. This happen 2 or 3 time to‐morrow and I question you why? I again tell 
you why? Mans and womans are similar in this world and then why mens honours 
woman? If they honours old old woman, one thing, but they honours young young 
lady. My purpose to write this to inform the Englis Sahebloks that when they do 
this they spoil their feminine lady and then this lady get proud and walk like 
pcock and then ask vote and then spoil Ken Garden and throw bomb on Loid Gorg, 
put bursting powder in envelope, and post, and create other mischief. Therefore 
I say to my Englis, please don't spoil Englis womans in India, because by 
honouring them you people put in their brain the sids [seeds] of sufragetism and 
then they get wild like Misses Pancurs. Please please print this leter near the 
Ruter's Telegram with big big words."'

What the writer of this eloquent appeal to the chivalry of the Englishman would 
have said could he have seen Ponnamal, an Indian woman, established in charge of 
the Nursery at Neyoor in South Travancore, honoured exceedingly by all who came 
in contact with her-among others, two English doctors-imagination fails to 
imagine. The Princess, Mr. Walker used to call her, for she had a stately way 
about her with all her gentleness; and the respect he had always felt for her 
was not lessened when he saw her rise to this new call to the arduous. He would 
have 'given his sit' to such a woman ten times over, and felt honoured to do it; 
and yet she was just Ponnamal; and she never knew she was wonderful, and that 
the doctor wrote that to see her at her work was a blessing to him; and her 
faith, especially through dark times, was an abiding inspiration; or that when 
her work was finished, we should read a book and find these words descriptive of 
her and her common, glorious toil: 'The love of duty is the strength of heroes, 
and there is no way of life in which we may not set ourselves to learn that 
love.'

By the time the new work was well established, Mr. Walker with my mother was in 
Dohnavur. I do not know exactly what caused that friend of friends, Walker of 
Tinnevelly, to become our champion. Perhaps, as was his wont, he waited till he 
knew all round about a matter before committing himself; and when he knew, threw 
fear to the winds, and was strong. I remember the first time I was sure of his 
sympathy. A three‐sheet official letter of criticism had come from home. I could 
not wonder at it. It was kind, but disapproving. To follow its counsels would 
have been to consign how many children? to perdition. I read it, and it chilled 
me, though it never occurred to me to be influenced by it. Then I went to the 
study where he sat writing, and gave it to him.

He read it slowly through, turning over the crackly pages with the greatest 
deliberation. 'There speaks the voice of ignorance,' was all he said; and I knew 
I could count on him thereafter. And count on him I did. For he was one of those 
rare valorous souls upon whom the opinion of the hour made no impression 
whatever. The opinion of that particular hour was summed up by a certain 
newspaper in India, to which, unfortunately-for it was quite out of sympathy-one 
of the Dohnavur books had been sent for review: we would live to repent our 
endeavour, was all it had to say.

A year later Mrs. Walker returned. One of the babies immediately took possession 
of her; loved her; said so, as only a baby can say such things. That which 
nothing on earth could have bought was hers the moment she entered the nursery. 
So she, too, was in sympathy before many days had passed.

As for my mother, she would have gathered all India into her heart; for India's 
imperilled children she had only one word, Welcome.

She and Ponnamal foregathered at once. My mother considered her a truly 
remarkable woman, and was never weary of discovering new gifts and virtues in 
her. Nor was I, for this new work, with its new demands upon courage and wisdom 
and, above all, unselfishness, found her prepared at every point. When the 
nursery at Neyoor had to be opened, so that some at least of the children might 
be within reach of medical help, it was of course Ponnamal I had asked to take 
charge of it. She was at that time in poor health; but Neyoor did good things 
for her, and she loved her nursery. The place was so beautifully kept that the 
doctors used to take visitors to see it; and many were the inquiries as to where 
she had been trained, so clever were all her devices for nursing babies, sick 
and well, and for managing generally. Of her own hard work few knew; it was 
always Ponnamal who had the illest baby by her at night; always Ponnamal who did 
the work which no one else had grace enough to do.

I went to Neyoor as often as I could, but it became more and more difficult to 
leave Dohnavur, as the family grew bigger and bigger; so that through almost all 
the more strenuous times Ponnamal was alone with her charge, and twice she 
worked through bad epidemics all but singlehanded, so far as reliable help went; 
handicapped by all sorts of misadventures too, but brave and resourceful as 
ever. One of these epidemics is indelibly marked in Arulai's memory, as she was 
the innocent cause of it. She had been visiting in a house in the Dohnavur 
village where there was small‐pox, and she had not been told about it. Next week 
she went to Neyoor, and developed small‐pox in that houseful of babies. The 
doctors put up a mat shelter for her some little distance from the village; and 
there poor Arulai and the babies, who of course followed in rapid succession, 
abode in what Arulai recalls as a baking oven, till they recovered, as they 
mercifully all did. Far otherwise was the next, when a more serious foe than 
small‐pox attacked the little children. They died then one after the other, 
sometimes two in a day.

Every day through those years Ponnamal wrote to me, and every week she sent the 
babies' weights and notes of their progress. One of these bulletins lies before 
me; seventeen babies' weights are given and mother‐news about each. Of the joy 
of the little flying visits I paid I can hardly bring myself to speak. They are 
too full of Ponnamal to be easy to contemplate steadily. For just that little 
space, a time whose minutes ran with breathless peace through the hours, she 
threw aside the burden of her sole responsibility, and rested her heart in me, 
as I rested mine in her.

Once, after a visit to the Neyoor Nursery, I asked that occasional postcards of 
cheer might be sent to her, knowing how she would appreciate them, especially if 
no address were given, as then she would not feel they must be answered, and for 
answers I knew she had no time. And I mentioned also babies' knitted vests, 
safety‐pins, and soap, as things the Nursery liked. The response to this 
immediately was over a hundred postcards from all parts of the world, numbers of 
letters, safety‐pins galore, and soap tucked into parcels of vests to make up 
weight. Ponnamal, who had no idea she was known outside the family, was amazed 
at this shower of pleasant things, and she stored her postcards and letters in 
bags and kept them to regale me when I went over. Some of them are by me now, 
love‐words that did their work. There was one friend who always seemed to divine 
when trouble was within about three weeks of us, and with the trouble almost 
invariably would arrive a postcard with the Hampstead postmark. 'I began to look 
out for it when things went wrong,' Ponnamal once told me, 'and was quite 
surprised if it did not come.'

In a land where belief in signs and omens is cultivated as a science, it was not 
wonderful that the first great disaster to our work, that fatal epidemic, shook 
the faith of all who were not committed to it in deepest ways. Shortly after the 
first baptism of a group of young girls "a group unique, I suppose, in the story 
of missions in India" the storm fell. 'The blast of the terrible ones is as a 
storm against the wall' is a word which reads to us straight from life.

It is an old story now, and I would not touch on it, but for the dauntless 
courage it discovered in Ponnamal. Child after child died; the doctors were 
away, and the help at hand was hardly sufficient to deal adequately with the 
trouble. The two nurses-the only older ones we had-lost heart: 'If another baby 
dies, we shall know the blessing of God is not on this work,' was their 
conclusion. Another died, and another, and they prepared to depart and leave 
Ponnamal with the young inexperienced girls, and eight or nine babies still ill, 
all the sick‐nursing to do, all the foods to make, and her own strength failing. 
Then some evil men who lived next door awoke to the opportunity; their 
wickedness was a nightmare to Ponnamal, with the convert girls on her hands; and 
I was recovering from a threatened breakdown, and till the worst was over was 
not allowed to go to her. From the very heart of it all she wrote "and of the 
evil things that befell us that year, these I have mentioned were the least", 
'The storm will not last always. The waves dash into our little boat, but when 
the Lord says, "Peace, be still," they will lie down. Let all your prayer for us 
be this, that we may rest in the Will of God while the storm lasts.'

Was it wonderful that I loved her, counted her precious? 'I do not want people 
who come to me under certain reservations. In battle you need soldiers who fear 
nothing.' So said Pere Didon; so say I. Can any words fitly express the 
preciousness of such a one?

We had the sympathy of some in our distresses; but many seemed to agree with the 
nurses that these untoward happenings should be understood to imply the 
disapproval of Providence. Just then, when it was most needed, came a mighty 
cheer. It was a letter from one who understood: 'I know what you will be going 
through now,' she wrote, 'and how people will be telling you the attempt will 
end in failure, and that you are wrong to try to do the impossible; but do not 
heed them.' And she went on to say that she believed all work that had in it the 
seed of eternity was bound to pass through a baptism of suffering and be 
misunderstood, decried, and judged by its apparent failure or success. Let none 
of these things move you, was the burden of her letter; and Ponnamal rejoiced in 
it. 'That is the truth,' she said, 'and we shall live to prove it.'

At last the Neyoor plan grew too difficult. We had so many children that we 
could not manage in Dohnavur without Ponnamal. So we built another Nursery here, 
and on a happy day, crossed as it was by fears of all that being quite 
doctorless was sure to mean, but helped exceedingly by the arrival of a trained 
nurse, Miss Wade, henceforth a beloved co‐worker, Ponnamal and her babies 
returned.

# Carry On
Dates fly from me, and I do not incline to pursue them. They do not seem to me 
essential to the spirit of a picture, and a picture of Ponnamal is what I want 
to make. But for the sake of those who esteem them and cannot be happy unless 
facts are fixed by these neat nails, I give forthwith those few which stand out 
clearest.

Between 1897 and 1905 we itinerated together. In September, 1905, Ponnamal went 
to take charge of the Nursery opened in Neyoor. In March, 1908, she returned to 
Dohnavur. On March 28, 1913, she went to hospital, struck down by cancer. From 
that on till August 26, 1915, she suffered.

The years that followed our gradual abandoning of the work which before had been 
meat and drink to us, and our equally gradual embarking upon what eventually 
proved to be too absorbing to leave room for anything else, do not melt, as the 
years before them do, in a golden haze; nor do they appear in the least as 
jewels pleasant to the sight. Rather are they as curtains of tapestry, with 
figures of glad and of sorrowful countenance worked on a background of dull 
drab. The canvas is rough to the touch, and I am too near the curtains to get 
the proper effect. I see the texture and detail, not the result. But such talk 
is folly. Who ever does in this life see the true result of his doing? His 
glooms and his glories he knows as he lives through them; sometimes the one, 
sometimes the other makes his day. The pattern they are weaving is hidden in 
confusion. And oftentime he is conscious of neither, being too tired out for any 
feeling but one of thankfulness for having got through. Those were the years 
when we seldom knew what it was to have an unbroken night's sleep, for little 
injured children came who needed constant care. And in the tropics it is very 
hard to go on without enough sleep.

What made it so difficult was that there was a constraint laid upon us to keep 
the work pure. In India the care of young children is not considered honourable 
work, and the kind of women willing to do it are not of a desirable character.

Once we were all but at the end of our strength. Shall we stop praying that 
children may be saved? the question almost shaped itself in that day of physical 
exhaustion. Prayer for helpers of the right sort had been answered by the 
Pastors, to whom we had sent a circular letter beseeching them to find us women 
of the kind we needed. 'No such women exist in the Tamil Church,' had been their 
calm, and as we were to prove, perfectly true reply. What were we to do? Cease 
to use means for the salvation of the children? Push them across the narrow 
space that lay between, into the arms of the Temple women, who never say, 
Enough? Or lower our standard and take anyone as worker who could be drawn by 
pay to do such work?

I can see Ponnamal now, as she stood one day wearily leaning against the nursery 
door, a slim, tired figure, with hands that for the moment hung limply down by 
her side. Then she looked up; our eyes met; each saw what the other saw, even 
the faces of little perishing children swept down by a black flood of waters. 
No, we could not slacken. But as to help?-a lower type of help would suffice for 
at least part of the work? We could neither of us deny that we were getting too 
near breaking down. We turned from the temptation, for such it was-we knew it 
even then to be that; and we knew it by a clearer knowledge afterwards. 'Let us 
work till we fall,' said Ponnamal; 'but do not let us have women in as nurses 
who will spoil the whole work.'

The band had scattered now, but we had a few of our own girls, converts who had 
been trained to honour work, and think no form of it common or unclean; and a 
few of the right mettle, fruit of fellow‐missionaries' labours, had come in from 
outside. But there are close‐set limits to the strength of a girl, and even when 
our welcome English nurse came out to our great help, the difficulty was not 
over, for an English woman in India cannot do all she would. Nor is it over yet; 
even as I write we are up against the question which yet can only admit of one 
answer. What shall we do? Each willing worker in the nurseries has as much as 
she can do. How can we go on growing? But we do go on.

One day-it feels like yesterday, but it is more than a year ago-I was much 
cheered by a visit from a mission school‐master, who, after seeing all round the 
place, exclaimed: 'And I hear you are short of workers. I will dedicate my 
eldest daughter to this work!' I asked him if his daughter were keen to do such 
work, and he looked a little shy, and also I thought a little young; still, 
looks are deceptive, and it is never wise to press matters in the East, or to be 
in any sort of hurry; so I left it and felt grateful. Ponnamal was ill then, and 
we all saved up our cheers for her; as soon as I could I took this one to her. 
She was much delighted, for we welcome warmly any indication of sympathy from 
our Tamil friends. 'Perhaps the time will come when many will feel like that,' 
she remarked hopefully, and we ate our little crumb of comfort greedily. A few 
weeks later we heard, and it really was rather a blow, that our sympathetic 
friend was not yet married.

We had, while the halo of the New was still upon us, some interesting offers of 
service both English and Indian.

'My friend is at present connected with another missionary society, but would be 
pleased to join you. She is forty‐five, very evangelical, and she cycles and 
sings.' 'It is more and more borne upon me that I am to come to you and help you 
in your noble work of rescuing those precious children' "or darling children, 
perhaps it was". 'In moments of depression I will whisper in your ear, Courage, 
brave heart!'-these are two of the most fondly cherished. And often even now in 
hours of pressure we recall the rejected offer from the very evangelical lady 
who cycled and sung. Would she do both at the same time and all the time, or 
alternately? we wonder, and we rebuke ourselves for having coldly regarded an 
offer to provide us with so exhilarating a spectacle, not to mention the 
assistance such an exhibition of cheerful agility would be in the practical work 
of life. And we remember too the whisper to whose tender ministry I had not 
inclined my ear. One day I tried its effect on Ponnamal, who was hot, and busy, 
and exceedingly worried over some bungling of her subordinates: 'Courage, brave 
heart!' She stared, too astonished for words. I am afraid that Dohnavur is not 
at all sentimental.

India's contributions to our necessities were oftener considered; for truly we 
sorely needed help, and a good, capable, middle aged pair of hands with a kind, 
sensible heart to direct them would have been acceptable many a time. But 
invariably after a few days, or, at longest, months, the owner of the hands we 
had so hopefully welcomed, and the heart we had imagined, discovered that it 
would be well 'to go and do God's work,' by which was meant become a religious 
instructor-the mouth in India being the member whose use brings most honour, and 
least of the arduous. Thus our halo faded, and we became quite commonplace, and 
only noted for the vice of being given to hard work, and an inconsiderate 
standard of truthfulness; altogether impossible people, and undesirable.

The toils of those years included for Ponnamal long journeys in the interests of 
children in peril. She was never robust, and the heat and racket and crush of 
the crowded trains, especially through night journeys, tried her very much. She 
would come back looking shaken to pieces, and disheartened perhaps by reason of 
failure; but always, when the next call came, she was ready for it. And such 
calls came frequently, for she was by far the most suitable for the peculiarly 
difficult work of child‐rescue-a work which demands, and especially demanded in 
its early precarious days, before that invaluable thing, a precedent, was 
established, high courage, and wisdom. A false move then, and we should all have 
been plunged in tribulation; worse by far, the newly launched little boat of the 
new endeavour would have been wrecked on the rocks that were never very distant. 
A single moment's hesitation, and under certain frequent circumstances another 
child would have floated downstream. As it was, with all our care, we had to 
stand helplessly by and see many such pass us for ever.

There was one over whom she mourned with me, a little Brahman child‐widow who 
got speech with one of us: 'Save me! I have heard of your religion, the 
Christian religion. They are taking me to a Temple house; I do not want to go. 
Save me! Make a way of escape for me that I may reach a Christian house.' She 
was spirited away; from town to town we traced her, then lost her in a Temple 
house in a South Indian city where, as one of its own Temple women told us, 
children are constantly adopted 'for Temple purposes.'

There was another, a charming child of seven or eight, who looked trustfully up 
at us and told us she was learning to dance, so that the gods might be pleased. 
Ponnamal dared much to save her; this work is full of the call to dare. But the 
child passed out of reach downstream.

And babies' faces we saw, and I see now. In the flesh I saw them first, in their 
white cotton hammocks, swinging in the dim low rooms of the Temple houses known 
to us. In the spirit I see them always on the black waters that flow without 
ceasing day and night through the midst of this sun‐filled land. But few see 
them, for most eyes are full of other sights. Be it so. We may not insist upon 
everyone's seeing such things; but we have seen, and the effect of such seeing 
is to cause those who have seen to feel that no passing weariness of the flesh 
or spirit can ever for one moment count as against the eternal importance of 
getting children out of the grasp of the gods. That for us was the only thing 
that mattered. So we laid hold together on the word that declares that He that 
raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken our mortal bodies; and we took 
it that if, for the right doing of the work set before us, a certain quickening 
was required in these our present mortal bodies, that quickening would be 
wrought in us by Him Who is not bound by time's to‐day or to‐morrow, being King 
of eternity. And I think it was wrought in us, or we could not have continued.

But our God was very kind to us: He sent us splendid help. I remember how 
Ponnamal searched the faces of the 'Sitties,' who one after another came to us 
through the years that followed. She was looking for that which we 
required-endurance, courage, a capacity for happiness, love. When she found it 
she was satisfied. 'God has chosen them each one,' she said to me as she lay 
dying; 'they will stand fast by you. I am not afraid to leave you to them; the 
anointing of their God is upon them.' For this work which gives so much more 
than anyone not in it will ever know-asks much, even all.

# An Ordinary Day, and Digressions
Ponnamal's ordinary day began before dawn; for, up till the time of her illness, 
she saw to the night food of any babies who required it. At that time most of 
the infants were in one large nursery, under her care; she had of course young 
girls to help her, but it was she who was responsible; and always she had the 
sick babies herself. She was a splendid sick‐nurse, and knew exactly how to 
manipulate the food for varyingly constituted babies. 'She knows far more than I 
do about it,' one of the Neyoor doctors said to me; and as he spoke I recalled a 
day when she told me how in her extremity she was inwardly directed: 'For the 
baby "it was Evu who had been at death's door and was still lingering 
thereabouts" could not take her food, do what I would. She was on Benger, and it 
had always suited her, but now it failed. I tried weakening it till it contained 
as little nourishment as I dared to give her; and I tried "digesting" it for a 
shorter and longer time, but nothing was of any use, and I did not know what to 
do. And then one day as I stirred in the flour, I lifted my heart once more, and 
said, "Lord, the inside of this little child is well known to Thee. Guide me, 
tell me what to do, or she will die!"' And then she told me how, as it seemed to 
her, the exact number of minutes the food should be 'digested' was suggested to 
her mind. The directions on the tin were otherwise, but she tried the new way, 
and immediately Evu began to mend, and recovered perfectly, to become one of our 
healthiest children.

So, after being up almost invariably several times in the night, Ponnamal's day 
proper began; and whenever possible it began with short informal prayers with 
the nurses, at half‐past five sometimes in the nursery while the babies slept in 
the hammocks all round, or in the milk‐kitchen, so that the fire‐glow fell on 
the little group kneeling on the floor.

As early as she could get them to come, she was ready for the milk‐sellers, and 
she tested and measured their milk. No one who has not done this sort of thing 
in the East can imagine all it entails of vigilance. There is not much in India 
about which there is not a chance to turn a dishonest anna, or, at lowest hope, 
a pie -a pie being a twelfth of an anna, which is a penny, which is the 
sixteenth of a rupee. But of all substances, solid or fluid, milk is perhaps the 
most accommodating, and Ponnamal needed all her nous in dealing with the 
milk‐sellers. 'The mind of the people of this land,' she remarked one day, 
'revolves round pies, annas, rupees; rupees, annas, pies.' We knew then that one 
otherwise minded is rare. We know it with tenfold more emphasis since Ponnamal 
was taken from us; for we have found it impossible to find anyone able to take 
her place, even in merely 'secular' ways.

'Have you not one relative or friend you could trust to help you in this work?' 
we asked the much overburdened Sellamuttu, known elsewhere as Pearl, after a 
grievous breakdown in good faith on the part of one from outside whom we hoped 
could have helped. 'Amma,' she answered simply, 'do not expect to find another 
Ponnamal or even another such as I, by the grace of God, in the matter of truth 
now am; for such you will not find.'

After the milk‐buying came the food‐making. For years Ponnamal did this entirely 
herself. And till we had our own English nurse she was always the one to help me 
in making up the medicines if any were needed. Her clear head was of wonderful 
assistance in working out the doses in correct proportions. But here again, as 
in the housekeeping matter, I feel hardly one in a thousand will realize what it 
meant to have her help.

Take a concrete case, one of scores: Preena, the Elf, was ill with enteric. The 
Walkers had just gone home, and the night they left, the only sound in the house 
was the moaning of the delirious child. I remember how empty the house felt, and 
how silent, and yet it was not empty or silent. Those who had to leave us were 
not forgetting us as their bullock‐carts trundled off; and we were not alone. 
But the nursing of typhoid night and day, even with a doctor to pilot one 
through, must always be arduous work; without a doctor, it is, to put it 
briefly, killing. Toward the end of the time, the child, who had been doing 
well, suddenly developed a new trouble. Her throat seemed to shut up, and for 
three days she swallowed nothing. I searched desperately through Moore's Manual 
of Family Medicine and Birch's Management of Children in India, our two standbys 
here, but found nothing relevant to her condition; and with eyes that could 
hardly see the print pored over the four columns of A Dictionary of Domestic 
Medicine and Surgery, by Dr. Thompson and Dr. Steele, which ponderous volume 
sometimes showed us the way we should go. All in vain; Preena had walked out of 
the pages devoted to her malady in all three books. It is a dreadful way 
children in India have, this branching off into vagaries in illness. 'What does 
the book say about it?' 'It says nothing at all!' How often we go through that 
experience of despair. Months later, in an old edition of Moore, I found a 
small‐print note to the effect that a certain swelling of the glands of the neck 
is a possible, though unusual, complication in enteric. But that day I found 
nothing.

Think of what it was at such a time to have one like Ponnamal alongside, able to 
look after all I had to leave undone, and ready, too, to make up the medicines 
for the village people; for we had what was almost a village dispensary in those 
days. It was rest to the tired‐out mind to feel she could not if she tried make 
a mistake in a calculation, so accurately did her clear brain work; all would be 
correct to the fraction of a minim.

This gift of precision was one for which my soul sang many a Benedicite. Who 
that has had to diagnose an infant, hunt through medical books for corresponding 
symptoms, make up the very minute doses, and give them, and all in what 
sometimes was tearing anxiety, but will appreciate the comfort of such help? In 
the earlier days of the work, as I have said, some very miscellaneous children 
were sent to us-weakly, diseased, hurt little mortals. We could not refuse them, 
though they were not the kind of child we existed to save; we had to do our best 
for them all. Some died, but others throve; and on the whole, doctorless as we 
still are, we are a very healthy family.

Ponnamal was rather wonderful, too, in the way she learned to appreciate methods 
which to her were entirely new and crudely Western. The Indian mind is made of 
folds, firmly folded in unexpected places. You despair of ever winning to the 
far end of it, there are so many plies in it, as Samuel Rutherford said in a 
different connection, and Ponnamal's mind was Indian. The first time I remember 
our differing about anything vital was when I wanted the babies to sleep in the 
open air. Ponnamal had been brought up in the usual Indian fashion; a stuffy 
little room with every window carefully shut at night was her idea of things as 
they should be. As soon as possible we built airy rooms, with verandahs on which 
the children could sleep; and life was made as much out of door as possible; and 
Ponnamal, in her loving solicitude for the babies, feared this very much, and 
the creases within were evident. But I knew she would speedily iron them all 
out, and waited in peace. Presently I saw her do it; and she soon became as keen 
about fresh air for the children as we were. When her own little daughter came 
from school with signs of tubercle upon her, she threw herself heartily into the 
fresh‐air treatment, and Purripu grew into a healthy girl. 'Look at Purripu,' 
her mother would say to anyone who, dismayed by our new‐fangled ways, cheerfully 
prophesied chronic colds ending in premature death all round. 'She was thin and 
stooping six months ago, and always tired. Now look at her!'

But this is a digression, though belonging in spirit to the ordinary day.

As long as she could, Ponnamal had a Bible‐class with her young nurses in the 
forenoons; but as the work grew, this became impossible. And it hardly mattered; 
for her whole life was a lesson. No girl, however naturally self‐centred or 
indolent, could be with her without catching something of her brave unselfish 
spirit; a spirit that toiled unto weariness every day it lived, and cared for 
nothing but the children's good.

In the afternoon, if all were well, she went to her own little room behind the 
nursery, and rested for an hour. But if a baby were ill, or any other anxiety 
pressed, it was hard to get her to rest; if her heart were anxious, her body 
could not rest. Then came the evening milk to be tested and measured, and the 
night foods to be made, and so the ordinary day ended.

But how little of it I have told! There were so many other things tucked into 
its corners-little acts of helpfulness, careful thoughts that worked out into 
some new economy or some new endeavour-that a book might be written about them 
alone. For example, while she was measuring the milk, a servant would pass, and 
she would call him aside for a moment and say a word or two. And the next thing 
we who had to see to the larger matters of life were aware of, was some pieces 
of work about which we had consulted together, accomplished, or set on foot. She 
had that faculty, as rare as nous, the power to get things done. And in a land 
where a workman comes, bargains about the work, says he will do it to‐morrow, 
takes the inevitable advance without which a carpenter cannot mend a stool, or a 
potter make a pot, or a mason build a house, and then goes away, finds a distant 
relative has just deceased, goes to the funeral, and forgets to come back till 
you have spent what ought to have been his wages on coolies to go and search for 
him, this faculty is invaluable.

Then there were those other days, when everything seemed to go wrong on purpose: 
'Piria Sittie is learning how upsetting things can be in India,' Ponnamal said 
once about Miss Wade, who was experiencing what the land can do in the way of 
heaping up difficulties. Or if, later, the newly launched litle school were 
plunging about in troubled waters, she would sympathize, and lend a helping hand 
by trying to replan the nursery work so as to make the dove‐tailing of the two 
halves of the family a little easier to compass. Or we would be suddenly 
involved in some tangle of circumstances, where her sagacity was required to 
find the way out; or perhaps it was a battle for a child-a battle in the 
heavenlies, to be fought out on our knees; or something needing for its handling 
the very wisdom of God. Whichever it was, Ponnamal, as I have said before, was 
ready. Many a wise and silent raid upon the kingdom of darkness was thought out 
by her, and often she led it herself. Once she came back in triumph with a baby 
in her arms, about whom the town-a famous Temple town-was so stirred that it all 
but rose in streets, but did not; for the quieting hand of our God was upon it.

But that last was a strange experience. The child's mother, knowing the peril to 
which her little babe was exposed, put it herself in Ponnamal's arms with the 
hurried whisper, 'Hasten out before you are waylaid.' Ponnamal knew well that if 
she were, the angry hunters after such prey would coerce the mother into denying 
what she had done. She knew the upshot would be a false case, with all the 
paraphernalia of witnesses ranged ready to forswear themselves for four annas a 
head. And she knew how such things end; what she had done would be a crime-she 
knew right well its penalty. But not even the word prison, a word that strikes 
the Tamil heart cold, held terrors for her. In a work like this, open at all 
times to attack which no ingenuity of man or woman could avoid or repel, was it 
not something to have for a fellow‐worker one to whom the word 'fear' was a word 
unknown?

Only once I saw her shrink. It was when the shadow that is never far from us 
seemed about to close round me. She did not seem able to bear it. A thousand 
times Yes to it, if she were the one to be engulfed-for the one she loved it was 
different. But she came to be willing for even that, if thereby a child could be 
saved; and beyond that I know of no more loyal, perfect love.

# Ahead of Her Generation
The years of search, and of service, and of shouldering what to her had been 
large responsibilities, developed all that was fine in Ponnamal. She had always 
been remarkable for earnestness, but now there was a new air of sure‐footedness 
about her. She had learnt to walk in slippery places without slipping. Her 
judgment had ripened, too; I found myself turning more and more confidently to 
her for counsel in difficult hours.

So also, apparently, did the people about us; for they brought all manner of 
matters to her, from the maladies of their babies to the marriages of their 
daughters. I used to wonder sometimes how they regarded her views on the latter 
subject; Ponnamal could be caustic when she chose.

It was she who explained to me the mysteries of the marriage market. In India we 
do not buy our brides as do the barbarous: we buy our bridegrooms; and in our 
part of the country the price, called by courtesy daughter's dowry, is arranged 
on a sliding scale according to the examinations passed by the suitor, so much 
per examination or 'failed pass.' Thus a B.A. is so much, a 'failed B.A.' so 
much, next come a 'First Arts' and a 'failed F.A.' then 'Matriculate' and 
'failed Matric.' The plan is simple, but it spells ruin for a parent who wants 
to marry his girls to educated men, and Ponnamal considered it wrong every way. 
But she was far ahead of her generation on the whole subject; she disapproved, 
for example, of girls being committed to the irrevocable fact of marriage before 
they knew their own minds, and she thought the marriage question should be 
lifted up into a higher atmosphere, and approached in a finer spirit than that 
common now. She had other thoughts too, even rarer; for she held that India 
needed the service of the unmarried woman as well as of the married; and that 
the time must come when this would be acknowledged by the Church in India. She 
never compared the relative holiness or devotion required for the two kinds of 
service; she simply held that India needed both, and that there was work to do 
which only one who was free to be 'absorbed in her duties towards her Lord' "I 
quote from Mr. Arthur Way's translation of 1 Cor. vii. 34" could do; and indeed 
the proof of this lay all about us.

'When it is taught that the Cross is the attraction,' she said, quoting a 
favourite word of ours "whose truth she did not think was much taught now", 
'things will be altogether different.' She knew that for many sacrifice would be 
found in the bringing up of a family for the highest ends; but for some she 
believed it would surely lead to a turning from the greatest human joy for the 
sake of those who must otherwise be left to perish. All this, even this last, 
which as yet in our community is not recognized as true or possible or even 
desirable, Ponnamal said when occasion arose, in her usual incisive fashion; and 
courage and her principles were tested. While Purripu was still young, hardly 
more than a school‐girl, a suitor was suggested by some members of her family. 
The dowry difficulty could be overcome, as there was money obtainable if only 
Ponnamal would compromise a little, in the matter of putting jewels on her 
daughter, and in other small concessions to the spirit of the world. But that 
was not Ponnamal's way.

Later, when her illness made the matter of Purripu's future one of serious 
concern, she was assailed on all sides; relatives, friends, neighbours, even the 
most unlikely came to see her about it, and they wearied her spirit exceedingly. 
For by this time the mother knew her daughter's mind, and to Purripu the desire 
had come to follow in her mother's steps and take up what she could of the work 
that must soon be laid down. Should she be forced to abandon it? Ponnamal faced 
it out. She only wanted to obey; she knew that 'obedience leads to unexpected 
places and knows no precedents;' there was no precedent for her guidance now, 
and the mother‐love in her could not rest without some clear sign from her Lord. 
Alone in hospital she was given such a sign. It was of the kind that could not 
be controverted. And to the credit of her relatives be it told, that when once 
they knew of it they left her in peace, and all her prayer for Purripu from that 
day forward was that she might go on in strength. 'Let not her crown be 
tarnished, Lord,' was the sum of all she asked.

But it was not her mind on these subjects which interested our neighbours, who 
liked her better when she met them on their own ground, which after all is the 
most we can usually do for the rank and file of our own generation. You cannot 
pull people uphill who do not want to go: you can only point up. So she listened 
patiently to their long involved and explicit descriptions of symptoms, cause, 
never mere result, of discrepancies within; and to the much‐tried mothers of 
many infants she was an angel from heaven.

It was in the morning and evening chiefly, when the milk‐sellers came, that 
Ponnamal held her clinics. Up would come an agitated mother, with a brass vessel 
of milk in one hand and a baby in the other. The milk tested, measured, and 
poured out, the baby would be introduced. Then if business allowed it, Ponnamal 
would go into its matters and, amid yards of talk from the mother, interrupted 
by many remarks from the baby, extract as many facts as she could. Or, it would 
be a stolid four‐year‐old, clothed in a bead and a bangle, who, too disgusted 
for speech, would be solemnly spread on its parent's knee, and poked in divers 
places till a squeal announced the discovery of some vulnerable point.

Among Ponnamal's books is one of dilapidated appearance, a translation into 
Tamil of a simple medical book written in 1860 by one Edward Waring, Physician 
to the Maharajah of Travancore. In it, clearly set forth, are many maladies with 
their appropriate treatment, so far as a lay person can attempt to treat them. 
Where that is undesirable the fact is noted; but where bazaar remedies can help, 
such are suggested, and the stumbler in these obscure regions is guided in the 
way he should go. This book, with, as commentary thereupon, Ponnamal's 
experience at Neyoor, furnished her, ingenious and commonsensed person that she 
was, with the means to help many, and her fame as a medico was great. One day 
she received the following English letter, written in one long paragraph:

'DEAR SISTER,

'Though we had no personal talk yet I think you could recollect me. I hear you 
are doing the service of God: very good. I am doing medical practice privately 
too. I treat cases. I have got very efficacious medicines for diabetes, leprosy, 
asthma, etc., and diseases considered to be hopeless. Some medicines were taught 
and given by a Yogi [Hindu ascetic]. He is a graduate, and was drawing four 
hundred rupees a month from Government and had children also. He made 
arrangements for their maintenance and left everything; he is in Benares 
practising religious life. Nothing happens in the world without the will of God. 
I am a daily communicant and was inspired to write you these few lines. In 
addition to your work do you like to do "qualified" medical practice? It will be 
very useful. If you like I can get you a diploma from Colombo for the medical 
practice. You can learn it yourself if I send you the books. The cost of the 
books is five rupees. The medicines are made into globules and given electricity 
power. For every disease there are numbers; 1, 2, 3, etc., and according to the 
number you must prescribe the medicine for each disease. You can learn it in no 
time. To diagnose disease you must go through our materia medica. This business 
will not tire you much, and you can get many friends if you begin to practise. I 
am the commission agent for this district. I have got medicine chests containing 
all the medicines for all the diseases for ten rupees. If you require an order I 
can send to you.

If you require any other informations I am ready to give you.'

The letter concluded with moral reflections: 'Where there is a will there is a 
way.' 'Our life is like a cloud rapidly vanishing,' and so on. The humours of 
life in the East are unfailing.

# Our Arm Every Morning

We have come now to the year 1912. There are some dates that do not fly. The 
time down to the minute lives with me.

It was Saturday, August 21, at half‐past eight in the morning. A civilian, keen 
on music, had been staying with us, and instead of departing at seven as he had 
intended, he had gone to the big schoolroom with us, and we with the children 
had been singing English hymns. The bright little picture stands out clear-Miss 
Wade at the organ; the children, to whom every white man is a mixture of hero, 
saint, and playfellow, pressing round; flowers looking in at the window and down 
from the roof, for a climbing allamanda, with its large soft yellow flowers, 
grew in between the top of the wall and the roof, and hung its bells overhead. 
We finished with 'The King of Love,' and then came joyfully up to the house, the 
children as usual all excitement to see the motor‐cycle start. On the 
dining‐room table lay the letters-and a telegram: 'Walker dangerously ill.'

Mr. Walker had gone to the Telugu country to take meetings. Mrs. Walker was in 
England. This telegram which had been delayed for two days was the first 
intimation we had had of any trouble. Five hours later, the second telegram 
came: 'And they shall see His face; and His Name shall be in their foreheads.'

Can words tell what Ponnamal was to us all through that time? For some days the 
compound was besieged by crowds of people, who, appeared at intervals and roamed 
about noisily, raising clouds of dust, and filling the place with unquietness. 
Ponnamal helped us to soothe and disperse them. Then, when at last we were left 
to our grief, grief for the one in England, the children, ourselves-for in this 
order it advanced upon us-to me, stripped as I verily felt I was at that moment 
of my strongest earthly stay, she said: 'It must be that you are meant to lean 
on God alone.'

At first it seemed as if we might hold on, but could not dare to develop 
further: it felt impossible to face the anxiety of growing bigger. This will not 
be understood by the brave and self‐reliant souls of whom fortunately the world 
contains so many; nor will it be clearly intelligible to any except those few 
who know the conditions under which we work. This attack on the hidden heart of 
a system dominant in India for centuries carries in itself possibilities unknown 
to the nearest friend outside it. It is quite different from any other work 
known to me in twenty‐four years of life.abroad; quite different too, of course, 
from any sort of philanthropic work, in much of which Hindus themselves are 
genuinely interested. On the surface what we are doing looks usual enough; and 
to visitors who see nothing of the shapes behind the children, it is all quite 
obvious and pretty. But those shapes are always visible to us, and to Ponnamal 
they were visible always. It was with relation to this, the undefinable, the 
inexplicable, that Mr. Walker's presence had been such a strength and help to 
us.

He knew India as few know it; he was wise as few are wise; and he had that 
rarest gift of never failing one at a crisis. And then, too, his sympathies were 
bound up in the work; the children were not just 'the children' to him-they 
might have been his own; he thought of them so tenderly, and so individually, 
that one could always go to him and talk over matters connected with their 
varying characters, sure of his interest, the interest of one to whom the matter 
in hand really belongs. 'I have no man like‐minded who will naturally care for 
your state:' how often the word has come to me since that good friend departed.

Ponnamal realized this from the first. It was in her mind when she said, 'It 
must be that you are meant to lean on God alone.' And then gradually I 
understood that what had been rather a trouble to me at times was now to be a 
comfort. For often, when in times of uncertainty I went to the little study for 
advice, I had to come away without it. 'I don't know anything about it,' he 
would say; for he was not one of those who never say, 'I don't know.' It was as 
if often he could only help by turning to his Lord, and asking Him to help us; 
and was not that one way left open to him still? More and more as I pondered it 
the curious fact emerged that, though I had hardly realized it, so perfect had 
his sympathy been, yet he had never once taken the initiative or the 
responsibility in any matter concerning the work; he had not ever advised where 
its more intricate problems were concerned, for they touched upon things in that 
Underland life which he knew was beyond his ken. He had championed us; and to 
that championship we owed much of our freedom from molestation. He had 
sympathized with us in a way which halved every grief and doubled every joy. But 
that which was essential to the continuance of the work did not depend on him, 
but on the One who dieth no more. A friend sent me just then a Mildmay text, 
'Thou remainest;' and a Dohnavur comrade painted in blue letters on brown teak, 
'Be Thou their arm every morning;' these words were comfort and strength to me.

And to my dear Ponnamal too. For in all this she shared, as indeed did every one 
of our united household. Of them all, Ponnamal was the only one whose knowledge 
of the conditions of this land fitted her to be counsellor. But she had been 
left, and our treasure, Arulai, was with us too; and I was ashamed of the 
feeling of bereftness that had at first laid hold on me in spite of the 
multitude of comforts that had refreshed my soul. So we went on. And to our 
astonishment-so foolish are we and ignorant-that which we had thought we could 
not do, we did, God being our Arm every morning.

# Her Pain
It was Friday, March 28, of the following year, another of those dates that can 
never be forgotten. Ponnamal had been ailing for some weeks, but no premonition 
of serious trouble disturbed us; our chief anxiety was a sick baby. In the 
intervals of life I was trying to get 'Walker of Tinnevelly' written, and one 
day, that day, into the middle of it plunged an excited messenger: 'Ponnamal has 
a bad pairs, it has seized her suddenly! Can you come?' Before the end of the 
description of that pain was in sight, I was with Ponnamal.

There is so much suffering and sorrow in the world just now that I think hearts 
must be too sore to bear needless medical detail, so two years and five months 
shall go into a paragraph.

It was cancer; an operation stayed matters for a while. There were, however, 
complications which detained us in hospital for three months. We returned home 
thankful and hopeful. But Ponnamal soon began to suffer more. Treatment, 
operative and other, failed to do more than give temporary ease. So matters 
continued till October 5, 1914, when we were told cancer had returned and that 
nothing could be done. In one way it was a relief to know that the misery of 
more operations was to be spared her. But she suffered, with only occasional 
respite, till August 26, 1915, when she was released from the body of this 
death.

And now memories crowd upon me: which shall I take and show?

A room with a bed in it, and beside the bed a table with a shaded lantern on it. 
Ponnamal lies on the bed breathing so quietly that in the dim light I can hardly 
see if the sheet moves with her breath. It is the first night after her 
operation, and she is half unconscious yet. Suddenly into the stillness of the 
night, startling one with the weirdness of it, pours forth a torrent of 
prayer-prayer for the doctors who had tried to help her; for me-and the utter 
love in the words brings the tears stinging into my eyes for the children, her 
little beloveds; name after name pours out, as child after child comes up in her 
faithful memory. At last she stops, exhausted; her pulse seems to me in my 
terrible anxiety to fail. Should I call the doctor, who had told me to call him 
if there were any change? But he is tired after a long day's work, and I think 
longingly of our one trained nurse at home on furlough who would give all she 
possessed to be here now; and so the hours pass till the welcome morning dawns, 
and with it hope.

Weeks have passed since that night. Ponnamal is facing another operation, calm 
and quiet; but within is a very disappointed heart. The post has brought a 
letter from Dohnavur, and we are reading it together. It is from Arulai, fragile 
in body, and even then on the edge of illness, but triumphant in spirit. She is 
in charge at Dohnavur, helped by all who are there, but still the one upon whom 
the heaviest burden falls. She has been counting, not in days, but in hours and 
in minutes to the time of our return. This new trouble has moved it, who can 
tell how far off? This is what she writes: 'Are you tasting the sweetness of 
this time? I am.' And light comes back to Ponnamal. She too 'tastes the 
sweetness of the time.'

And now bright, golden memory; a bullock‐cart, moving slowly round the 
mountains' foot; and in the cart Ponnamal, looking out with rejoicing eyes. 'I 
never expected to see them again,' she says, as she watches the hills soften and 
darken against a yellow sky; and she tells me how on that last day at Dohnavur 
she had balanced her accounts so as to leave all straight for me. And as she 
talks, my heart shakes with mighty throbs of thankfulness that I have her warm 
and living beside me.

I see a compound now in the early joyful morning, freshened by the first June 
rains, its greens and terra‐cottas mingling happily, its calm encircling hills 
half asleep in sleepy mists. Then there is a shout and a rush; everywhere little 
blue figures are dancing about us, and the air is full of laughter; and Ponnamal 
is, lifted out of the cart and carried in; and there are palms up everywhere, 
and flowers.

And again, a great waste field; but even as I look at it, it grows into an 
ordered garden with rows of plantains-banana is the word that gives the sense of 
'the undulating green which is its glory. And up and down among the plants 
Ponnamal is walking, still unsteadily, but rejoicing to be walking at all. A 
tent is pitched near the well where a pair of bullocks draw water for the field; 
the splash of the falling water fills the picture with a sense of coolness. Soon 
Ponnamal, wearied but happy, walks slowly to the tent and rests.

It was a constant joy to us so to see her in this garden of her own creation, 
blessed help through the days when her heart would not let her be without doing 
something for the general good, but her head could not bear the noise and 
movement of the nursery. Ponnamal's garden, it will always be called; it is in 
fruit now, and we wonder if she sees, and is pleased.

And for last-late Christmas Eve: the nursery with its whitewashed walls and 
red‐tiled floor; a lamp is burning low; a sick child gazing far away with that 
aloof look in her eyes that says, 'I belong to another country.' And watching 
her, with arms that ache to take her and nurse her back to life, Ponnamal. For 
she has crawled up to the nursery, constrained thither by the love in her; and 
now exhausted by the effort, but serene in the victory of her spirit over the 
oppressive and reluctant flesh, she sits stifling the groan that breaks from 
her-type, though she little dreams it, of that which lights the ages as 
star‐shine a black night: the imperishable quality of Love.

# Her Music
It was in that same Christmas week that Ponnamal heard for the first time what 
she always described as her music. She was at that time taking aspirin, a drug 
which up till a little later was sufficient to keep the worst pain under. She 
took it every six hours, and when the time drew near for taking it could hardly 
wait for it, though she disciplined herself to wait with a will that never 
faltered. But when her music began she entirely forgot it. She described the 
music variously: sometimes she seemed to recognize voices singing familiar 
words; then at other times it was only music, but such melodious sound that she 
wanted to lie awake all night and listen to it. This she could never do. Within 
ten minutes of its beginning she was asleep, and she would sleep the whole night 
through, and wake refreshed, not having touched medicine. There was never any 
need for her to tell us when she had heard this music: her face told us; the old 
beaming smile would return, and we would hear again the merry care‐free laugh. 
It was as if she had bathed in the night in the waters of immortality, and been 
renewed.

The good thing wrought in her was so apparent that a guest of the time doubted 
the correctness of the sentence of death that had been passed upon her. There 
was no outward sign of illness; was it credible that anyone in the grip of such 
a disease could be like this? A few minutes' 'music,' a single night's reprieve 
from pain, could hardly account for such exaltation of spirit, and above all 
such a sense of health; and it seemed as if Ponnamal began to think so too.

One morning, after a night of restful sleep, she felt so well that we walked 
round the compound together, and she noticed as usual things that should be put 
right. A heavy branch in the great tamarind tree was not safe, and she suggested 
a way by which it might be propped up. While we were considering it, the 
church‐bell began to toll, and she remarked calmly, 'The village people will 
think it is for me.' The word caught at something in me, and she knew it. 'Don't 
be troubled,' she said, and stopped to pour loving, reassuring words upon me; 
'perhaps we shall go together; not now, but when the work for the children is 
finished.' But severe suffering followed upon this; and her hope faded.

Once, after a long silent interval, she heard her music in the afternoon, which 
was unusual. She fell asleep as she listened to it, and woke after two hours, 
feeling, as she said, quite well. And she got up at once and dressed eagerly, 
hardly daring to believe in her reprieve. Then, as it still continued, she 
walked to the upper part of the compound, where some new nurseries were being 
built. There, charmed afresh by the beauty of it, she stood gazing across to the 
mountains and then round about her at the flowers. For our compound enclosed in 
its walls is like a great garden; all manner of lovely things grow happily in 
it, its trees are always green. People coming into it from the dried‐up land 
beyond have wondered at its greenness; and so, indeed, did we, till, a few days 
ago, some workmen sinking an artesian well struck a river flowing fifty feet 
below the surface. Back in the far ages that river had been caused to flow from 
the western mountains, through the heart of the wide field, that was set apart 
for us; and now its streams make glad our little city of God.

'It is like a new world to me,' said Ponnamal, as she walked slowly round the 
big circle reserved for a playground, and looked at the nurseries grouped about 
it; and behind them to the mountains, lighted now in sunset colours. She had 
spent many days in her room, and though it was kept like a little bower, this 
was different; she did not know how to enjoy it enough. And the thought that 
must have passed through a thousand minds shaped afresh in ours: If earth can be 
so beautiful, what must the heavenly places be?

The next night she heard her music again. She told the girls who were with her 
at the time, and who heard nothing, to be quiet that she might listen; and as 
usual she left her medicine untouched. She woke next morning saying, 'Why do the 
cocks crow so soon?' a remark which amused her immensely when she was awake 
enough to understand what she had said; for the most welcome of all sounds to 
her through those months was the crowing of the cocks that told the long night 
was nearly over.

I have thought sometimes that, if we had only our recollection to depend upon, 
we might doubt now, lest our imagination were painting the grey facts of that 
painful time-and to colour facts is criminal. But this note, one of several, is 
sufficiently definite; it is dated January 21, 1915. 'Ponnamal had a wonderful 
night. Music and singing, then sleep, from 9 p.m. till 5 a.m. She woke so happy 
that involuntarily she clapped her hands for joy. She thinks that Lulla "a 
five‐year‐old child who left us for Paradise, clapping her hands with 
unmistakable delight" must have had some such experience of happiness when she 
clapped her hands.'

Another entry of about the same date records how she had herself wondered if it 
could be imagination; but after it had been frequently repeated, and each time 
so effectually banished her pain that she had no need of medicine, she came to 
believe it was something real, and after listening to the words of a hymn "'How 
sweet the Name of Jesus sounds'", sung, as she thought, by ten or fifteen 
voices, she gave up all question, and took it to be the kindness of her Lord 
that allowed her to overhear a little of the music of the Land of Song, to whose 
borders she had come.

For ourselves, we accepted it as among the many things of life which we may only 
know in part until for us too the curtain of sense wears thin; and we had long 
since learned to set no limits to the dealings of the Lord with His beloved. But 
we began to wonder if things as yet hidden from us were contained in this 
illness; and when one came to the house who was earnest about following the 
primitive Church custom of anointing the sick, Ponnamal being desirous, she was 
anointed. We could not be sure that the answer to our prayers would be health 
restored. We should have felt it unchildlike, unbecoming, to be peremptory with 
our most loving Father, or even perpetually insistent. Not 'Thy will be 
changed,' but 'Thy will, be done,' was the prayer given to us to pray. And we 
laid a palm branch across her bed as she lay waiting, in token that either way 
it would be victory.

From that day forward, Ponnamal grew rapidly worse, and we knew that we were 
answered: 'What I do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter.'

# In the Midst of the Furnace
And it was victory, though that victory was not always apparent at the time. And 
because to‐day there are many called to stand on the outer side of just such 
fires, I will try to set down that which every now and then was shown to us for 
our comfort, till we learned that for those who suffer in righteousness there is 
appointed an angel of the Lord who smites the flame of the fire out of the 
furnace, and makes in the midst of the furnace as it had been a moist whistling 
wind, so that the fire cannot touch them at all, neither hurt nor trouble 
them-though indeed for the moment, to us who observe them, things may seem far 
otherwise.

We had not, at the time I am thinking, of now, used morphia; aspirin still 
sufficed to keep things tolerable. But that drug ran short, and a substitute was 
supplied which was useless. I wired to those of our family who were on the 
hills-for it was our hot season and they had to be away-and they sent a supply 
of the right medicine to us as soon as possible; but the five days which passed 
before it came were such that at last we had to give a hypodermic, only to find 
that the morphia recently supplied had lost its power. Those who have lived 
through such a time will know how every minute sensation bites into the soul, 
etched into it as with a red‐hot needle.

But now for the comfort: Ponnamal told me afterwards that when the pain was at 
its height it was as if the Lord Himself stood by her, quoting to her familiar 
words; and she said, 'The waters did not overflow me, nor did the flame kindle 
on me; no, never once.' There had been no indication that things were so. All we 
had seen was a poor, tormented, or at best stupefied body, a house with its 
blinds drawn down, whose words, when there was speech at all, were only about 
its pain.

Later, when we were together again, she longed for her music; and one evening 
one of her Sitties played softly at some little distance from her room, hoping 
by suggestion, if it might be so, to woo those sweet strains back to her. Did 
the angels smile tenderly on our poor attempts, I wonder? Ponnamal did. 'I heard 
the baby organ last night,' she remarked next morning. 'Did it ease you? Did it 
make you sleep?' and she turned her great, dark, loving eyes upon us and smiled. 
And then, fearing she had been ungrateful, she said, 'It was Prémie Sittie, was 
it not? Indeed, I enjoyed listening.' But she never spoke of it as resembling 
that other music, which never came now.

Sometimes she was a little troubled because she had none of the ecstatic 
feelings she had read that others had when death was near; and one day, when we 
were talking about walking by faith, and of the mark of His confidence it was 
when our God trusted us to do it and to be content to do it, she said: 'Yes, I 
know that is what I am to do; for the life to come is as a sealed book to me. I 
do not fear, I have peace, but I have no feeling of great joy: all is silent and 
sealed.' This continued to be so till one night a comforting dream was granted. 
Early in the morning long before dawn she sent for me; she could not wait till 
morning to tell it. She was sinking, she said, in a deep stream, and the weeds 
grew thick and entangled her, and she called, and instantly the Lord Himself was 
with her, and the next moment-but 'a moment' does not express the 
instantaneousness of it-she was with Him. Then she began to praise, saying, 
'Amen. Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, 
and might, be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen.' And then thinking I was 
there, she turned to me. 'O my mother, where are the children?' she asked; and 
awoke on earth again. But the seals of the book had been broken by the gladness 
of that bright dream.

As often as we could through those months she had what Samuel Rutherford calls 
the comfort of 'Christ's fair moonlight in His word and Sacraments.' Hallowed 
hours those were, set in stillness, and filled with a peace that neither pain 
nor grief nor any fear could touch. When, in the days that came after, the 
waters compassed her about, even unto the soul, and the depths closed her round 
about, and the weeds were wrapped about her head, she would recall her light, 
and in the strength of her Risen Lord forbid the darkness to engulf her. Thus, 
receiving abundance of grace, she reigned in life by One Christ Jesus.

She was still as clear in brain as ever. The storms of pain that swept over her, 
the large doses of depressing drugs she had to take, appeared to have no 
ill‐effect on her wonderfully powerful mind. She followed the war news closely, 
and to her the story of the angels at Mons which reached us long before the 
news‐papers had begun to argue over it, was natural, not wonderful; and so was 
the still more intimate account of the White Comrade. But when the gallant young 
brother of one of the Sitties was left wounded on the field, and 'Missing' was 
the only word that came to us about him, then the thought of the War became too 
personal and poignant, and we had to keep its heavy shadow from her: she had not 
strength to bear it. Almost to the end she heard all the family news; advised 
with her old wisdom; was still in all ways her loving, ardent, eager self. So 
full of vitality she was that it seemed as if she could not die.

Once while I was reading to her from the Song of Songs, a book which was as 
honey in the comb to her, she laughed with joy. We had just read the verse, 'Who 
is she that cometh up from the wilderness leaning upon her Beloved?' when she 
exclaimed, 'Oh, that is a happy word!' and she told me that a few nights before, 
when the medicine failed to give her sleep, she lay tossing about and turning 
from side to side, finding ease nowhere, till at last she cried aloud and said, 
'O my compassionate Lord, I want to rejoice, but I cannot. The air is hot, and 
my bed is hot, and the pain is weariness to me.' And it was as if He came 
quickly very near her and soothed her, telling her He understood; and reminding 
her of this very word, He told her she was coming up out of the wilderness, not 
long to stay in it. 'Because the way is short, I thank Thee, Lord'-and yet she 
was not hurried in spirit to go; she was far more eager to stay, if only she 
could help us by staying. But the human part of her stood on tip‐toe to be off, 
and once she said longingly, speaking of Christiana and how she received her 
token, an arrow with a point sharpened with love let easily into her heart, 'It 
is a long ten days since I received my token, and I am not away yet. When will 
the good day come?'

One morning Purripu, who was one of her devoted nurses, brought her a great vase 
of unopened violet passion‐flowers, trained in light sprays over branches of 
henna, our Indian mignonette. 'Watch; they will open at nine o'clock,' she said, 
as she put the vase on the table beside her mother. And Ponnamal watched; and 
just before nine o'clock the interlaced filaments began to stir as if conscious 
of the time, and by the hour appointed all the flowers were open. Ponnamal had 
long known the ways of Passion‐flowers, but the morning hours are busy in the 
nursery, and she had never had leisure to watch the little moving miracle. 'Just 
at the hour we keep holy as the hour He was crucified, His flower of Sorrow 
opens, and shows all mysteries,' she said; and her thoughts travelled back to 
Calvary, and she sucked sweet comfort from the word that tells us we have not a 
High Priest who cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities. Her room 
was full of the scent of the flowers when a little later I was with her, and in 
her face was peace.

'Words I have known all my life have a new force within them now,' she said 
suddenly one day; and she told how a great dread had been upon her, lest when, 
near the end, the pain grew more violent, and her will weaker to endure, she 
would not be able to bear it. And once when this fear oppressed her, almost like 
a voice speaking aloud, the words of the promise reassured her: 'God is 
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will 
with the temptation also make a way of escape, that ye may be able to bear it.' 
That negative verb, which in Tamil idiom has it that God will not give room for 
such a thing to happen, was an immense comfort to Ponnamal, and she took delight 
in Ridley's words to Latimer: 'Be of good cheer, brother; for God will either 
assuage the fury of the flame, or strengthen us to abide it.'

Often during those last weeks if one of us went in the twilight to her room we 
would find a little silent figure sitting close beside the bed. It was Tara, or 
Evu, or Lullitha, three of the merriest, most healthily restless little mortals 
ever created. But they would sit by Ponnamal in perfect silence for an hour at a 
time. Others of her nurslings would come too, steal in for a kiss, and slip out 
again, awed by the unwonted aspect of life in that little room; but those three 
children minded nothing if only they might be with her. If she could bear to 
listen, they would tell her stories of the others, and of their gardens, and pet 
birds, and games; and all the old hunger of love would be in her eyes and in the 
tones of her voice as she listened and asked questions, drawing out their little 
tales. Another constant visitor was her old father, who stayed with us for 
months so that he might be near her. One day he asked if he might bring the 
barber, from time immemorial India's only physician; and finding that celebrity 
proposed to do no more than feel pulses, we consented, and he came.

It was a curious scene; the barber, a good friend of ours, and in his way an 
intelligent man, felt first the right pulse, then the left, and steadfastly 
regarded Ponnamal. 'How long has she to live?' demanded the old father; but this 
was too much for Ponnamal's sense of the ludicrous; she broke into a peal of 
weak laughter, and the doctor amazed turned to the father. 'There is a vitality 
in her,' he replied in his best medical manner, 'which it will take some weeks 
to reduce.' 'That is so,' murmured the old man, I much strong food has she; milk 
in infinite quantities, and the essence of foods.' 'And owing to this she is as 
yet full of the spirit of life,' continued the doctor affably; but he stood 
looking at her with a puzzled expression, for she was being fed on what he 
regarded as nothing short of poison-rice‐water for diet, with, when the pulse 
fails, a decoction of pig's tusk, stag's, or rhinoceros' horn, tiger's claw, and 
a little silver and gold, added to the ordinary medicine, being the correct 
treatment. Ponnamal knew this, and understanding his mind, began to tell him in 
Whom lay her strength and confidence and happiness; but he hardly listened. He 
had seen; and to that Hindu man accustomed to something very different in a 
sick‐room, the sermon that told was written in her face.

After he left she talked of the young barber, and of her many Hindu friends in 
the villages about us. It appeared more than ever pitiful to her now that they 
should go on without the one Light which Lightens life's darkest places, slaves 
to the temporal, the unimportant. And a story Mr. Walker had told just before he 
left us seemed exactly to fit her feeling, and she longed to get all who came to 
see her to understand how much there was in it. It was about the carved device 
and inscription over three of the doors in the Milan cathedral. Over one door, 
roses, 'All that pleases is but for a moment,' over another a Cross, 'All that 
grieves us is but for a moment'; and over the central door only the words, 
'Nothing is important but that which is eternal.'

Early in July we had our last sustained conversation. 'Last night,' she said, 'I 
had less pain than usual, and my mind was clear. When the confusion passes, and 
power to think returns, then my heart rises as if released from a weight; I can 
pray and praise. But first I examined myself to be sure all was well with me. 
For many days I had felt nothing, not even comfort, all was dimness and a blank 
and silence; then as I told my God about it He showed me that all through the 
days the joy of His salvation was within me, unchanged by any misery of pain. It 
was there, but I could not taste it. The darkness and the sadness of that time 
was caused by the medicine; it was not that I had lost anything. This comforted 
me, and I praised Him greatly and was content.' For many days her mouth had had 
that drawn look which those who have nursed anyone through sore suffering will 
know too well. But as she talked the old sweet, satisfied look returned, and all 
the old happy curves were there again. 'Oh, is it not wonderful!' she exclaimed 
with a sort of vigorous joyousness. 'For days and nights the waves beat hard on 
me, and then suddenly there is a great calm, and I lie back and rest.'

Then she asked for the last few verses of 1 Cor.15, repeating after me the 
words, 'Thanks be to God which giveth us the victory.' And then I read the 46th 
psalm to her, and she fell asleep.

After this her words were few. Only once, as she lay in what seemed to us who 
were outside it unimaginable misery of body, she from the innermost core of it 
told me how she had hoped to be allowed to stay; she thought she could help us a 
little 'if the pain did not pass this limit.' It seemed to me the most unselfish 
word I had ever heard from human lips. And as she spoke, her eyes, the most 
living part of her now, seemed to devour me with the passion of love in them, 
and her hands held mine as if they could never let them go. Verily love is 
eternal: many waters cannot quench it, neither can the floods drown it; if a man 
would give all the substance of his house for love it would be utterly 
contemned.

And by this token, sure and glorious, we know the best is always in front, never 
behind. What can death do to that which is eternal? That which pain could not 
kill can death destroy? What is death but a door? They stooped as they passed 
through, for the door is low. Then suddenly they were unclothed and clothed 
upon, and clad in new garments they walked on, who shall say in what new powers 
of life, who shall say to what new experiences of joy? But does the dress we 
wear change the spirit within us? Do new powers weaken that in us which was 
mighty before? Do new joys blot out old loves? By all the love that ever was 
since love first woke in the world, it cannot be. They loved us a moment ago; 
with the whole strength of their being they loved us. They love us now; they 
will love us for ever. The old story rings true today: Those our beloved, ever 
beholding that Face that doth minister life to beholders, will be glad when they 
hear the sound of our feet stepping over our Father's threshold; for they do not 
forget: they love, and love cannot forget.

And so, these things being true, it must be that the best we have known is only 
the foretaste of some very far better to come. Can less be contained in the word 
that tells us we shall be satisfied with the goodness of the house? Would less 
than life's best content us in the land of the immortals? We shall have our best 
again, purified, perfected, assured from change for ever.

Thank God, there is a limit set to pain, though to love there are no limits. 
Ponnamal touched hers, as I have told, on August 26. It was night; but the night 
was full of voices, saying, 'Her warfare is accomplished': and for her it was 
Day.

# Our Triumphal Procession
Funeral: the word where the holy dead are concerned should be a singing word. It 
should shine, like a light that has suddenly broken through a rack of dark 
clouds. It should call with the call of bugle. We set our hearts upon causing it 
to be something of this for our children and the village people.

Early in the morning we filled the room with flowers. She lay as she had fallen 
asleep, on her little cane bed, covered with sprays of jessamine; and our 
friends the men servants, directed by Aruldasen whom she had loved from his 
childhood, carried her out, while behind her streamed the children, over a 
hundred of them all in white and yellow, our Dohnavur festival colours, and the 
little ones in blue for love. Then, valiantly led by the older girls, the 
children sang songs of triumph, and the one note struck, or that we tried to 
strike, was joy that our dear one was happy and well, with Christ; and joy, too, 
that we should meet her again in a little while.

There was grief, but no gloom in our hearts as we left her-not her, but the 
tired body that had finished its work-sown as a seed to await its resurrection. 
Only we wanted to follow in her steps, and run the race, and fight the fight 
faithful to the end. And sweet old words ran in my mind as I sought for grace to 
have done with selfishness: 'What a singing life is there! There is not a dumb 
bird in all that large field; but all sing and breathe out heaven, joy, glory, 
dominion to the high Prince of that new‐found land.' And so, looking over 
'beyond the line, and beyond death, to the laughing side of life, the world,' we 
did that day by the help of our God triumph and ride upon the high places of 
Jacob.

In the afternoon we met again in the school‐room, decorated now with every 
joyful thing we could put in it, palms over the pictures, masses of yellow 
allamanda, white tuberosa growing in fragrant spikes. The room even empty looked 
radiant; filled as it soon was with the children in their colours, it was to me 
at least, like a little space of the heavenly garden let down for our comfort 
and gladness.

And yet it was not an easy gathering to lead into triumphant ways, for we are 
very human, and we wanted Ponnamal; it was difficult, most difficult, 'to learn 
to do without.'

We had met now to read some letters she had left for us. How well I remembered 
those letters being written! We were in hospital, and it was thought probable 
that her disease had returned, but nothing could be definitely decided without 
an examination under chloroform. If it proved to be cancer back again, the 
doctors would operate at once. The issue in that case of course must be 
uncertain, so that we had to go through what might be our good-bye before the 
operation. It was then she wrote her letters. I can see her now, sitting up in 
bed, eagerly and with pain-for it hurt to sit up-writing quickly. The letters 
finished, she asked us to sing to her; and under difficulties we sang up to the 
moment the stretcher‐bearers came for her.

These letters were read now: there was one for the girls, and the children, the 
Sitties, and for me. They are, I think, too intimate for even this very intimate 
book. Love filled them, overflowed them; mine ended with these words: 'the 
kisses of eternal love.' Oh, what they miss who do not know that love is 
eternal!

My story has been told. It goes out into a world spent with suffering, wounded 
unto death. But death is not the end, it is only another beginning, and that 
which makes life lovable and glorious cannot die, for Love is eternal.