# Anedoctes

## Absence from Week-Night Services

'Prayer-Meeting and lecture as usual on Wednesday evening, in the lecture-room. 
Dear brethren, I urge you all to attend the weekly meetings. 'Forsake not the 
assembling of yourselves together.' Some of the 'dear brethren' deported 
themselves in this way: Brother A. thought it looked like rain, and concluded 
that his family, including himself of course, had better remain at home. On 
Thursday evening it was raining very hard, and the same brother hired a 
Carriage, and took his whole family to the Academy of Music, to hear M. Agassiz 
lecture on the 'Intelligence of the Lobster.' Brother B. thought he was too 
tired to go, so he stayed at home and worked at the sledge he had promised to 
make for Billy. Sister C. thought the pavements were too slippery. It would be 
very dangerous for her to venture out. I saw her next morning, going down 
street to get her old bonnet 'done up.' She had an old pair of stockings drawn 
over her shoes. Three-fourths of the members stayed at home. God was at the 
prayer-meeting. The pastor was there, and God blessed them. The persons who 
stayed at home were each represented by a vacant seat. God don't bless empty 
seats.United Presbyterian. 


## Access

There are many locks in my house and all with different keys, but I have one 
master-key which opens all. So the Lord has many treasuries and secrets all 
shut up from carnal minds with locks which they cannot open; but he who walks 
in fellowship with Jesus possesses the master-key which will admit him to all 
the blessings of the covenant; yea, to the very heart of God. Through the 
Well-beloved we have access to God, to heaven, to every secret of the Lord. 


## Activity: a Help to Courage

Courage maintains itself by its ardent action, as some birds rest on the wing. 
There is an energy about agility that will often give a man a fortitude which 
otherwise he might not have possessed. We can picture the gallant regiment at 
Balaclava riding into the valley of death at a dashing gallop, but we could 
scarcely imagine their marching slowly up to the guns, coolly calculating all 
the deadly odds of the adventure. There is much in our obeying as our Lord did, 
'straightway.' When the Lord gives his servants grace to follow out their 
convictions as soon as they feel them, then they act courageously. First 
thoughts are best in the service of God, they are like Gideon's men that 
lapped. Second thoughts come up timorously and limpingly, and incite us to make 
provision for the flesh, they are like those men whom Gideon discarded because 
they went down on their knees to drink, they took things too leisurely to be 
fit for the Lord's battles. 


## Advent: Looking for the

I was told of a poor peasant on the Welsh mountains who, month after month, 
year after year, through a long period of declining life, was used every 
morning, as soon as he awoke, to open his casement window, towards the cast, 
and 
look out to see if Jesus Christ was coming. He was no calculator, or he need 
not 
have looked so long; he was no student of prophecy, or he need not have looked 
at all; he was ready, or he would not have been in so much haste; he was 
willing, or he would rather have looked another way; he loved, or it would not 
have been the first thought of the morning. His Master did not come, but a 
messenger did, to fetch the ready one home. The same preparation sufficed for 
both, the longing soul was satisfied with either. Often when, in the morning, 
the child of God awakes, weary and encumbered with the flesh, perhaps from 
troubled dreams, perhaps with troubled thoughts, his Father's secret comes 
presently across him, he looks up, if not out, to feel, if not to see, the 
glories of that last morning when the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall 
arise indestructible; no weary limbs to bear the spirit down; no feverish 
dreams 
to haunt the vision; no dark forecasting of the day's events, or returning 
memory of the griefs of yesterday.: Fry. 


## Affliction: an Incentive to Zeal

There is an old story in the Greek annals of a soldier under Antigonus who had 
a disease about him, an extremely painful one, likely to bring him soon to the 
grave. Always first in the charge was this soldier, rushing into the hottest 
part of the fray, as the bravest of the brave. His pain prompted him to fight, 
that he might forget it; and he feared not death, because he knew that in any 
case he had not long to live. Antigonus, who greatly admired the valour of his 
soldier, discovering his malady, had him cured by one of the most eminent 
physicians of the day; but, alas! from that moment the warrior was absent from 
the front of the battle. He now sought his ease; for, as he remarked to his 
companions, he had something worth living forhealth, home, family, and other 
comforts, and he would not risk his life now as aforetime. So, when our 
troubles are many we are often by grace made courageous in serving our God; we 
feel that we have nothing to live for in this world, and we are driven, by hope 
of the world to come, to exhibit zeal, self-denial, and industry. But how often 
is it otherwise in better times! for then the joys and pleasures of this world 
make it hard for us to remember the world to come, and we sink into inglorious 
ease. 


## Affliction: Attendant upon Honor

In the ancient times, a box on the car given by a master to a slave meant 
liberty, little would the freedman care how hard was the blow. By a stroke from 
the sword the warrior was knighted by his monarch, small matter was it to the 
new-made knight if the royal hand was heavy. When the Lord intends to lift his 
servants into a higher stage of spiritual life, he frequently sends them a 
severe trial. He makes his Jacobs to be prevailing princes, but he confers the 
honor after a night of wrestling, and accompanies it with a shrunken sinew. Be 
it so, who among us would wish to be deprived of the trials if they are the 
necessary attendants of spiritual advancement? 


## Affliction: Awakening Gratitude

Afflictions when sanctified make us grateful for mercies which aforetime we 
treated with indifference. We sat for half-an-hour in a calf's shed the other 
day, quite grateful for the shelter from the driving rain, yet at no other time 
would we have entered such a hovel. Discontented persons need a course of the 
bread of adversity and the water of affliction, to cure them of the wretched 
habit of murmuring. Even things which we loathed before, we shall learn to 
prize when in troublous circumstances. We are no lovers of lizards, and yet at 
Pont St. Martin, in the Val D'Aosta, where the mosquitoes, flies, and insects 
of 
all sorts drove us nearly to distraction, we prized the little green fellows, 
and felt quite an attachment to them as they darted out their tongues and 
devoured our worrying enemies. Sweet are the uses of adversity, and this among 
them: that it brings into proper estimation mercies aforetime lightly esteemed. 


## Affliction: Effects of in Different People

'How different are summer storms from winter ones! In winter they rush over the 
earth with their violence; and if any poor remnants of foliage or flowers have 
lingered behind, these are swept along at one gust. Nothing is left but 
desolation; and long after the rain has ceased, pools of water and mud bear 
tokens of what has been. But when the clouds have poured out their torrents in 
summer, when the winds have spent their fury, and the sun breaks forth again in 
glory, all things seem to rise with renewed loveliness from their refreshing 
bath. The flowers, glistening with rainbows, smell sweeter than before; the 
grass seems to have gained another brighter shade of green; and the young 
plants which had hardly come into sight, have taken their place among their 
fellows in the borders, so quickly have they sprung among the showers. The air, 
too, which may previously have been oppressive, is become clear, and soft, and 
fresh. Such, too, is the difference when the storms of affliction fall on 
hearts 
unrenewed by Christian faith, and on those who abide in Christ. In the former 
they bring out the dreariness and desolation which may before have been 
unapparent. The gloom is not relieved by the prospect of any cheering ray to 
follow it; of any flowers or fruits to show its beneficence. But in the true 
Christian soul, 'though weeping may endure for a night, joy cometh in the 
morning.' A sweet smile of hope and love follows every tear; and tribulation 
itself is turned into the chief of blessings.


## Affliction: Endears the Promises

We never prize the precious words of promise till we are placed in conditions 
in which their suitability and sweetness are manifested. We all of us value 
those golden words, 'When thou walkest through the fire thou shall not be 
burned, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee' but few if any of us have 
read 
them with the delight of the martyr Bilney, to whom this passage was a stay, 
while he was in prison awaiting his execution at the stake. His Bible, still 
preserved in the library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, has the passage 
marked with a pen in the margin. Perhaps, if all were known, every promise in 
the Bible has borne a special message lo some one saint, and so the whole 
volume 
might he scored in the margin with mementoes of Christian experience, every one 
appropriate to the very letter. 


## Affliction: Increased with Our Strength

'I had,' said Latimer, describing the way in which his father trained him as a 
yeoman's son, 'my bows bought me according to my age and strength; as I 
increased in them so my bows were made bigger and bigger.' Thus boys grew into 
cross bowmen, and by a similar increase in the force of their trials, 
Christians become veterans in the Lord's host. The affliction which is suitable 
for a babe in grace would little serve the young man, and even the 
well-developed man needs severer trials as his strength increases. God, like a 
wise father, trains us wisely, and as we are able to bear it he makes our 
service and our suffering more arduous. As boys rejoice to be treated like men, 
so will we rejoice in our greater tribulations, for here is man's work for us, 
and by God's help we will not flinch from doing it. 


## Affliction: Making Us Long for Heaven

We had traversed the Great Aletsch Glacier, and were very hungry when we 
reached the mountain tarn half-way between the Bel Alp and the hotel at the 
foot 
of the AEggischorn; there a peasant undertook to descend the mountain, and 
bring 
us bread and milk. It was a very Marah to us when he brought us back milk too 
sour for us to drink, and bread black as a coal, too hard to bite, and sour as 
the curds. What then? Why, we longed the more eagerly to reach the hotel 
towards which we were travelling. We mounted our horses, and made no more halts 
till we reached the hospitable table where our hunger was abundantly satisfied. 
Thus our disappointments on the road to heaven whet our appetites for the 
better 
country, and quicken the pace of our pilgrimage to the celestial city. 


## Affliction: Noble Piety Nourished amid

'The pine, placed nearly always among scenes disordered and desolate, brings 
into them all possible elements of order and precision. Lowland trees may lean 
to this side and that, though it is but a meadow breeze that bends them, or a 
bank of cowslips from which their trunks lean aslope. But let storm and 
avalanche do their worst, and let the pine find only a ledge of vertical 
precipice to cling to, it will nevertheless grow straight. Thrust a rod from 
its last shoot down the stem, it shall point to the centre of the earth as long 
as the tree lives.' Amid the sternest trials the most upright Christian's are 
usually reared. The divine life within them so triumphs over every difficulty 
as to render the men, above all others, true and exact. What a noble spectacle 
is a man whom, nothing can warp, a firm, decided servant of God, defying 
hurricanes of temptation! 


## Affliction: Overruled to Promote Joy

Our afflictions are like weights, and have a tendency to bow us to the dust, 
but there is a way of arranging weights by means of wheels and pulleys, so that 
they will even lift us up. Grace, by its matchless art, has often turned the 
heaviest of our trials into occasions for heavenly joy.'We glory in 
tribulations 
also.' We gather honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock. 


## Affliction: Revealing Christian

When the green leaves bedeck the trees and all is fair, one cannot readily find 
the birds' nests, but when the winter lays bare the trees, anyone, with 
half-an-eye, may see them. Thus amid the press of business and prosperity the 
Christian may scarcely be discerned, his hidden life is concealed amid the 
thick and throng of the things of earth; but let affliction come, a general 
sickness, or severe losses in the family, and you shall see the Christian man 
plainly enough in the gracious patience by which he rises superior to trial. 
The 
sick bed reveals the man; the burning house, the sinking ship, the panic on the 
exchange, all these make manifest the hidden ones. In many a true believer, 
true piety is like a drum which nobody hears of unless it be beaten. 


## Affliction: Right View of

Our crosses are not made of iron, though painted sometimes with iron colors; 
they are formed of nothing heavier than wood. Yet they are not made of 
pasteboard, and will never be light in themselves, though our Lord can lighten 
them by his presence. The Papists foolishly worship pieces of wood supposed to 
be parts of the true cross; but he who has borne the really true cross, and 
known its sanctifying power, will value every sliver of it, counting his trials 
to be his treasures, his afflictions argosies of wealth, and his losses his 
best gains. 


## Afflictions: Tokens of Divine Regard

Lawns which we would keep in the best condition are very frequently mown; the 
grass has scarcely any respite from the scythe. Out in the meadows there is no 
such repeated cutting, they are mown but once or twice in the year, Even thus 
the nearer we are to God, and the more regard he has for us, the more frequent 
will be our adversities. To be very dear to God, involves no small degree of 
chastise


## Afflictions: Winning the Heart for God

Payson thus beautifully writes:'I have been all my life like a child whose 
father wishes to fix his undivided attention. At first the child runs about the 
room, but his father ties up his feet; he then plays with his hands until they 
likewise are tied. Thus he continues to do, till he is completely tied up. 
Then, when he can do nothing else, he will attend to his father. Just so has 
God 
been dealing with me, to induce me to place my happiness in him alone. But I 
blindly continued to look for it here, and God has kept cutting off one source 
of enjoyment after another, till I find that I can do without them all, and yet 
enjoy more happiness than ever in my life before.' 


## Age: No Care for Sin

According to AEsop, an old woman found an empty jar which had lately been full 
of prime old wine, and which still retained the fragrant smell of its former 
contents. She greedily placed it several times to her nose, and drawing it 
backwards and forwards said, 'Oh, most delicious! How nice must the wine itself 
have been, when it leaves behind in the very vessel which contained it so sweet 
a perfume!' Men often hug their vices when their power to enjoy them is gone. 
The memories of reveling and wantonness appear to be sweet to the ungodly in 
their old age. They sniff the empty bottles of their follies, and only wish 
they could again be drunken with them. Age cures not the evil heart, but 
exhibits in a ridiculous but deeply painful light the indelible perversity of 
human nature. 


## Ambition

Ambition is like the sea which swallows all the rivers and is none the fuller; 
or like the grave whose insatiable maw for ever craves for the bodies of men. 
It is not like an amphora, which being full receives no more, but its fullness 
swells it till a still greater vacuum is formed. In all probability, Napoleon 
never longed for a sceptre till he had gained the baton, nor dreamed of being 
emperor of Europe till he had gained the crown of France. Caligula, with the 
world at his feet, was mad with a longing for the moon, and could he have 
gained it the imperial lunatic would have coveted the sun. It is in vain to 
feed 
a fire which grows the more voracious the more it is supplied with fuel; he who 
lives to satisfy his ambition has before him the labor of Sisyphus, who rolled 
uphill an ever-rebounding stone, and the task of the daughters of Danaus, who 
are condemned for ever to attempt to fill a bottomless vessel with buckets full 
of holes. Could we know the secret heart-breaks and wearinesses of ambitious 
men, we should need no Wolsey's voice crying, 'I charge thee, fling away 
ambition,' but we should flee from it as from the most accursed bloodsucking 
vampire which ever up rose from the caverns of hell, 


## Apostates

In the long line of portraits of the Doges, in the palace at Venice, one space 
is empty, and the semblance of a black curtain remains as a melancholy record 
of glory forfeited, Found guilty of treason against the state, Marino Falieri 
was beheaded, and his image as far as possible blotted from remembrance. As we 
regarded the singular memorial we thought of Judas and Demas, and then, as we 
heard in spirit the Master's warning word, 'One of you shall betray me,' we 
asked within our soul the solemn question, 'Lord, is it I?' Every one's eve 
rests longer upon the one dark vacancy than upon any one of the many fine 
portraits of the merchant monarchs; and so the apostates of the church are far 
more frequently the theme of the world's talk than the thousands of good men 
and true who adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. Hence the more 
need of care on the part of those of us whose portraits are publicly exhibited 
as saints, lest we should one day be painted out of the church's gallery, and 
our persons only remembered as having been detestable hypocrites. 


## Appearance: We Must Not Judge by

Whatever truth there may be in phrenology, or in Lavater's kindred science of 
physiognomy, we shall do well scrupulously to avoid forming an opinion against 
a man from his personal appearance. If we so judge we shall often commit the 
greatest injustice, which may, if we should ever live to be disfigured by 
sickness or marred by age, be returned into our own bosom to our bitter sorrow. 
Plato compared Socrates to the gallipots of the Athenian apothecaries, on the 
outside of which were painted grotesque figures of apes and owls, but they 
contained within precious balsams. All the beauty of a Cleopatra cannot save 
her name from being infamous; personal attractions have adorned some of the 
grossest monsters that ever cursed humanity. Judge then no man or woman after 
their outward fashion, but with purified eye behold the hidden beauty of the 
heart and life. 


## Assurance: Excellence of

Believe me, the life of grace is no dead level, it is not a fen country, a vast 
flat. There are mountains, and there are valleys. There are tribes of 
Christians who live in the lowlands, like the poor Swiss of the Valais, who 
live 
between the lofty ranges of mountains in the midst of the miasma, where the air 
is stagnant and fever has its lair, and the human frame grows languid and 
enfeebled. Such dwellers in the lowlands of unbelief are for ever doubting, 
fearing, troubled about their interest in Christ, and tossed to and fro; but 
there are other believers, who, by God's grace, have climbed the mountain of 
full assurance and near communion, their place is with the eagle in his eyrie, 
high aloft; they are like the strong mountaineer, who has trodden the virgin 
snow, who has breathed the fresh, free air of the Alpine regions, and therefore 
his sinews are braced, and his limbs are vigorous; these are they who do great 
exploits, being 


## Attendance at Public Worship: Invitations to

In Edinburgh a Sabbathschool teacher was once visiting in a close, and in one 
of the top flats of a stair, found a poor family living in a small but clean 
room. From conversation with the father and mother, she soon discovered that it 
was one of those cases where, from the long illness of the father, the family 
had fallen from comparative comfort to poverty. He was now, however, better, 
and 
had been able for some time to work a little, so as to keep his family from 
destitution, but by no means to enable them to live in comfort. Having learned 
so much of their worldly concerns, their visitor next began to speak of their 
souls' interests. She asked them if they went to any church. 'No,' said the 
father, 'We used to go long ago, before I took ill; but we went no more after 
that.' 'But,' said she, 'you have been better for a good while.' 'Oh,' said the 
father, 'nobody ever asked us to come!' 'Well,' said the visitor, 'I'll ask you 
now,' and she directed him to a church where he would hear the glad tidings 
from a faithful minister. Next Sabbath several of the children were at her 
Sabbath-school, and told her that that day their family had been at church. 
Since that day they have been hearers of the Word. How many souls are perishing 
in Edinburgh and other towns, 'because, though all things are now ready, nobody 
ever asked them to come!' Will not the blood of their souls be required at the 
hand of those who profess to have tasted a Savior's love, and yet make not one 
effort to pluck brands out of the fire?Scottish Sunday School Teachers 
Magazine. 


## Attendance at Public Worship: Young Should Be Trained

The question is often asked how shall we get our working classes to attend 
public worship. The answer may be supplied by an incident of my boyhood. On the 
mantelshelf of my grandmother's best parlor, among other marvels was an apple 
in a phial. It quite filled up the body of the bottle, and my wondering enquiry 
was,' How could it have been got into its place?' By stealth I climbed a chair 
to see if the bottom would unscrew, or if there had been a join in the glass 
throughout the length of the phial. I was satisfied by careful observation that 
neither of these theories could be supported, and the apple remained, to me an 
enigma and a mystery. But as it was said of that other wonder, the source of 
the Nile: 'Nature well known no mystery remains,': so was it here. Walking in 
the garden 1 saw a phial placed on a tree bearing within it a tiny apple, which 
was growing within the crystal; now I saw it all; the apple was put into the 
bottle while it was little, and it grew there. Just so must we catch the little 
men and women who swarm our streets: we call them boys and girls: and introduce 
them within the influence of the church, for alas! it is hard indeed to reach 
them, when they have ripened in carelessness and sin. 


## Attention: Difficulty of Winning

Buchsell, in his 'Ministerial Experiences,' says,' I was surprised to observe 
that for some Sundays a rustic, whom I had never seen there before, now 
regularly made his appearance in church, but in the most open way in the world 
settled himself to sleep as soon as he was seated, and snored so loud that one 
heard him even during the singing. A boy, to whom I had often spoken, and who 
had an open, merry expression of face, was in the habit of placing himself not 
far from the snorer, and I now requested him to sit more immediately behind 
him, and to touch him from time to time in order to keep him awake. At first 
the 
lad refused to do this, but the promise of groschen led him to comply. During 
the whole service, I could see the contest carried on between the little fellow 
and his somnolent neighbor, and by a glance of my eye I sought to encourage the 
former to keep up the rousing process. On the following Sunday the rustic came 
again, and so did the boy, whom I begged to continue his good offices as 
before, but he declined; and when I held out the bribe of the groschen, he told 
me that the peasant had already given him two, on condition that he should not 
be disturbed.' Let us do what we will to enlist the attention of our hearers, 
we shall not find it an easy task. With our illustrations and anecdotes we may 
as it were be giving one groschen to secure the ear, but the world, the flesh, 
and the devil, with their cares, pleasures, and distractions, will always be 
offering TWO groschen to our one. Yet by God's grace we shall win the day, and 
conquer not alone the ear but the heart. 


## Bible

The historical matters of Scripture, both narrative and prophecy, constitute as 
it were the bones of its system; whereas the spiritual matters are as its 
muscles, bloodvessels and nerves. As the bones are necessary to the human 
system, so Scripture must have its historical matters. The expositor who 
nullifies the historical groundwork of Scripture for the sake of finding only 
spiritual truths everywhere, brings death on all correct interpretation.: J. A. 
Bengel. 


## Bible: Cause of Interest in It

The lifeboat may have a. tasteful bend and beautiful decoration, but these are 
not the qualities for which I prize it; it was my salvation from the howling 
sea! So the interest which a regenerate soul takes in the Bible, is founded on 
a personal application to the heart of the saving truth which it contains. If 
there is no taste for this truth, there can be no relish for the Scriptures.: 
J. W. Alexander, D.D. 


## Bible: How to Deal with Its Difficulties

An old man once said, 'For a long period I puzzled myself about the 
difficulties of Scripture, until at last I came to the resolution that reading 
the Bible was like eating fish. When I find a difficulty I lay it aside, and 
call it a bone. Why should I choke on the bone when there is so much nutritious 
meat for me? Some day, perhaps, I may find that even the bone may afford me 
nourishment.' 


## Bible: How to Hear

To some the Bible is uninteresting and unprofitable, because they read too 
fast. Amongst the insects which subsist on the sweet sap of flowers, there are 
two very different classes. One is remarkable for its imposing plumage, which 
shows in the sunbeams like the dust of gems; and as you watch its jaunty 
gyrations over the fields, and its minuet dance from flower to flower, you 
cannot help admiring its graceful activity, for it is plainly getting over a 
great deal of ground. But, in the same field there is another worker, whose 
brown vest and business-like forward flight may not have arrested your eye. His 
fluttering neighbor darts down here and there, and sips elegantly wherever he 
can find drop of ready nectar; but this dingy plodder makes a point of 
alighting 
everywhere, and wherever he alights he either finds honey or makes it. If the 
flower-cup be deep, he goes down to the bottom; if its dragon-mouth be shut, he 
thrusts its lips asunder; and if the nectar be peculiar or recondite, he 
explores all about till he discovers it, and then having ascertained the knack 
of it, joyful as one who has found great spoil, he sings his way down into its 
luscious recesses. His rival, of the painted velvet wing, has no patience for 
such dull and long-winded details. But what is the end? Why, the one died last 
October along with the flowers; the other is warm in his hive to-night, amidst 
the fragrant stores which he gathered beneath the bright beams of summer. 
Reader, to which do you belong?the butterflies or bees? Do you search the 
Scriptures, or do you only skim them? Do you dwell on a passage till you bring 
out some meaning, or till you can carry away some memorable truth or immediate 
lesson? or do you flit along on heedless wing, only on the look-out for 
novelty, 
and too frivolous to explore or ponder the Scriptures? Does the Word of God 
dwell in you so richly, that in the vigils of a restless night, or in the 
bookless solitude of a sick room, or in the winter of old age or exclusion from 
ordinances, its treasured truths would perpetuate summer round you, and give 
you 
meat to eat which the world knows not of?James Hamilton, D.D. 


## Bible: Judged by Its Fruits

A Roman Catholic priest in Belgium rebuked a young woman and her brother for 
reading that 'bad book' pointing to the Bible. 'Mr. Priest,' she replied, 'a 
little while ago my brother was an idler, a gambler, a drunkard, and made such 
a noise in the house that no one could stay in it. Since he began to read the 
Bible, he works with industry, goes no longer to the tavern, no longer touches 
cards, brings home money to his poor old mother, and our life at home is quiet 
and delightful. How comes it, Mr. Priest, that a bad book produces such good 
fruits?' 


## Bible: Power of Its Authority

The mother of a family was married to an infidel who made jest of religion in 
the presence of his own children; yet she succeeded in bringing them all up in 
the fear of the Lord. I asked her one day how she preserved them from the 
influence of a father whose sentiments were so opposed to her own. This was her 
answer: 'Because to the authority of a father I do not oppose the authority of 
a mother but that of God. From their earliest years my children have always 
seen the Bible upon my table. This holy book has constituted the whole of their 
religious instruction. 1 was silent that I might allow it to speak. Did they 
propose a question, did they commit a fault, did they perform a good action, I 
opened the Bible, and the Bible answered, reproved, or encouraged them. The 
constant reading of the Scriptures has wrought the prodigy which surprises 
you.Adolphe Monod. 


## Bible: the Spirit More than the Letter

It is easy enough to be learned in the letter of the Word, and yet to miss the 
spirit. If no other instance were before us, the Jewish people would furnish us 
with a most convincing one, for they have wholly missed the meaning of the 
Scriptures, and yet, Lightfoot tells us, 'They have summed up all the letters 
in the Bible to show that one hair of that sacred head is not perished. Eight 
hundred and forty-eight marginal notes are observed and preserved, for the more 
facility of the text: the middle verse of every book noted; the number of the 
verses in every book reckoned: and not a vowel that misseth ordinary grammar 
which is not marked.' 


## Bible: to Be Read with Delight

When Mr. Hone, who wrote the 'Every-day Book,' and was of sceptical views, was 
travelling through Wales, he stopped at a cottage to ask for a drink of water, 
and a little girl answered him, 'Oh, yes! sir, I have no doubt mother will give 
you some milk. Come in.' He went in and sat down. The little girl was reading 
her Bible. Mr. Hone said, 'Well, my little girl, you are getting your task?' 
'No, sir, I am not,' she replied,' I am reading the Bible.' 'Yes,' said he, 
'you are getting your task out of the Bible?' 'Oh, no,' she replied, 'it is no 
task to read the Bible; I love the Bible.' 'And why do you love the Bible?' 
said 
he. Her simple, child-like answer was, 'I thought everybody loved the Bible.' 
Her own love to the precious volume had made her innocently believe that 
everybody else was equally delighted to read God's Word. Mr. .Hone was so 
touched with the sincerity of that expression, that he read the Bible himself, 
and instead of being an opponent to the things of God, came to be a friend of 
divine truth. 


## Bible: Why Priests Withhold It

The true reason why the Papists forbid the Scriptures to be read is not to keep 
men from errors and heresies, but to keep them from discovering those which 
they themselves impose upon them. Such trash as they trade in would never go 
off their hands if they did not keep their shops thus dark; which made one of 
their shavelings so bitterly complain of Luther for spoiling their market, 
saying that but for him they might have persuaded the people of Germany to eat 
hay. Anything, indeed, will go down a blind man's throat.: Gurnal. 


## Bigotry

Some men magnify the importance of their own little clique of believers by 
denying the godliness of all who differ from them. They remind one of Bishop 
Racket's story. 'At Wimbledon,' says he, 'not far from me, a warrener promised 
Thomas, Earl of Exeter, that he should have a burrow of rabbits, all of them of 
what colour he pleased. 'Let them be all white,' said that good Earl. Whereupon 
I killed up all the rest but the white rabbits, and sold them away, and left 
not enough to serve the earl's table.' A sorry few would be left to serve the 
Lord, and preserve the name of Christ upon earth, if some men's judgments could 
be final. Blessed be God, the Judge of saints is not the rabbi of any of the 
rival synagogues. 


## Body and Soul

'Two things a master commits to his servants' care,' saith one, 'the child and 
the child's clothes.' It will be a poor excuse for the servant to say, at his 
master's return, 'Sir, here are all the child's clothes, neat and clean, but 
the child is lost!' Much so with the account that many will give to God of 
their souls and bodies at the great day. 'Lord, here is my body; I was very 
grateful for it; I neglected nothing 'that belonged to its content and welfare; 
but as for my soul, that is lost and cast away for ever. I took little care and 
thought about it!': Flavel. 


## Boldness (Holy): Congruous with the Gospel

Holy boldness honours the gospel. In the olden times, when Oriental despots had 
things pretty much their own way, they expected all ambassadors from the West 
.to lay their -mouths in the dust if permitted to appear before his Celestial 
Brightness, the Brother of the Sun and the Cousin of the Moon. Certain 
money-loving traders agreed to all this, and ate dust as readily as reptiles; 
but, when England sent her ambassadors abroad, the daring islanders stood 
bolt-upright. They were told that they could not be indulged with a vision of 
the Brother of the Sun and Cousin of the Moon, without going down on their 
hands and knees.' Very well,' said the Englishmen,' we will dispense with the 
luxury; but tell his Celestial Splendor, that it is very likely that his 
Serenity will hear our cannon at his palace gates before long, and that their 
booming is not quite so harmless as the cooing of his Sublimity's doves.' When 
it was seen that ambassadors of the British Crown were no cringing petitioners, 
our empire rose in the respect of Oriental nations. It must be just so with the 
cross of Christ. Our cowardice has subjected the gospel to contempt. Jesus was 
humble, and his servants must not be proud; but Jesus was never mean or 
cowardly, nor must his servants be. There was no braver man than Christ upon 
earth. He could stoop to save a soul, but he would stoop to nothing by which 
his 
character might be compromised, or truth and righteousness insulted. To preach 
the gospel boldly is to deliver it as such a message ought to be delivered. 
Blush to preach of a dying Savior? Apologize for talking of the Son of God 
condescending to be made man, that he might redeem us from all iniquity? Never! 
Oh! by the grace of God let us purpose, with. Paul,' to be yet more bold,' that 
the gospel may be yet more fully preached throughout all ranks of mankind. 


## Books: How to Make Them Intelligible

John Keble, the author of 'The Christian Year,' in a letter to Mr. (afterwards 
Sir) J. T. Coleridge, thus writes:: 'Have you read a little publication of 
Miller's, which I sent to James Coleridge, and if you have, how do you like it? 
Lest you should think his style in this new book too obscure for the 'Plain 
People,' I must tell you that he made Moliere's experiment, for he gave the 
sermons to his servant, quite a rustic lad, to read before he printed them, and 
the man said he understood them all except the fifth, which accordingly M. made 
plainer, till the youth professed himself satisfied with it. And his father, 
the clerk of the parish, had given the greatest proof of his understanding even 
of this the obscurest part, for he said to Miller, 'Oh, yes! sir, I see what 
you mean, you mean such-and-such people (naming them) by the one of your two 
classes, and such-and-such by the other.' I call this a very satisfactory 
experiment, quite as much so as most of Sir Humphrey Davy's.' In a letter to 
another friend on the same subject, Keble further adds:: 'I wonder whether 
people that write tracts for the poor, generally take this method; it seems 
mere common sense for them to do so, and yet one can hardly think they do.' 


## Books: Tried by Time and Posterity

Call it by what name you pleasedream, vision, or revery: we found ourselves in 
a large room, the wails of which were concealed by well-packed shelves of 
books, from the ponderous folio to the minute thirty two-mo, and in all the 
variety of dress which a skilful handicraft could devise. While cursorily 
gazing 
on these intellectual stores, our attention was arrested by the entrance of two 
personages of mild and venerable aspect, who very courteously introduced 
themselves, and stated the object of their visit. They bore the significant 
names of Time and Posterity, and intimated that they had come to pay their 
semi-centennial visit, to weigh the merits of authors, and determine their 
destiny. The task seemed to us an herculean one, where the volumes were 
numbered by thousands; and we were curious to know by what process they were to 
ascertain the character of so many candidates for fame. We might, however, have 
spared our surprise, had we reflected that Time was a gentlemen who had seen 
much of the world, and professed great experience, and Posterity was no less 
distinguished for the solidity of his judgment. They were well prepared for an 
expeditious performance of their work, and, in truth, we felt no small degree 
of 
horror in witnessing the results of their essay. By the way, we should have 
mentioned that they were provided with a capacious crucible, under which was 
burning a large and steady flame. Into it volume after volume was thrown, and 
the ordeal through which they had to pass was one of fire. 'Goodly volumes, 
these,' said Time, taking up a brace of octavos on metaphysics, 'let us test 
their quality.' Placed in the crucible, they were instantly converted into 
cinders.' Dust and ashes,' said POSTERITY. This was the doom of many an 
ostentatious volume, whose promising tide availed as little as its interior 
embellishments. Time rather soliloquised than addressed Posterity, while 
subjecting volume after volume. He would remark,' Deadborn this; its claims for 
perpetuity died amidst the types.' 'An old heresy under the slight disguise of 
a 
new dress.' 'Nonsense, fustian, bombast.' A whole row of poets succeeded each 
other in their descent into the heated crucible, with no more sympathy on the 
part of the executioner than a contemptuous exclamation. What is called light 
literature could scarcely be kept in the crucible long enough to be converted 
into thin smoke. Whole tons of periodicals and reviews shared the same fate. 
Occasionally we observed an unscorched leaf or two remained in the crucible, 
which Posterity carefully gathered and deposited in his portefeuille. At 
intervals, a whole volume would escapethis, however, was very rare; for in the 
instances in which they preserved their original shape, large portions of these 
fortunate volumes were burned out. For the most part, the large books fared 
worse than the smaller ones, from which we were led to infer, that facility in 
writing was quite a different thing from ability, and that a lumbering ship may 
be dashed on the rocks, over which a small boat may safely ride. Whole piles of 
periodicals (our own did not entirely escape) were soon converted into ashes. 
'Fabrications,' said Time, as he hurled volume after volume of history into the 
crucible. Some leaves, however, of most of them escaped, out of which Posterity 
remarked, he would make up a small volume of true history worthy of 
preservation. Many books of religious controversy, and many more of worldly 
controversies on all subjects went in with the ominously expressed doom, 'Dust 
and ashes,' and so they came out. We perceived a mast offensive effluvium 
arise, 
as certain 'Philosophical Disquisitions,' and 'Light of Reason' were submitted 
to the fiery test. Thus went forward the process, the further details of which 
might be tedious to enumerate, and in a very brief time the great library had 
so 
far disappeared that POSTERITY carried off what was left in a small but 
beautiful cabinet, made of enduring materials. We were left to wonder how human 
brains and iron presses worked to so little effect in this world of ours.: 
Presbyterian. 


## Brevity

Dr. Cotton Mather wrote over his study-door in large letters, BE SHORT. Callers 
upon ministers will please make a note of this; as also brethren who are 
lengthy at the prayer-meeting; Sunday-school teachers, in all their devotional 
exercises and addresses; speakers at public meetings, who have nothing to say; 
and ministers who are given to prosiness. 


## Casual Security

A number of men are upstairs in a house, amusing themselves with a game of 
cards. What is that? The window is red! What is that cry in the streets?' The 
house is on fire!' says one.' Oh,' answers another, 'shuffle the cards again, 
let us finish the game; we have plenty of time.' 'Fire! Fire! Fire.' The cry 
rises more sharply from the streets, but the gamblers continue their game. One 
of them swaggeringly boasts, 'It's all right, my brave boys, yon door leads to 
the roof, and we can get out at the last minute. I know the way over the leads: 
it's all right, go ahead with the game.' Presently one of them nervously 
enquires; 'Are you sure that we can get through that door?' and he goes to try, 
but finds it locked. 'Never mind,' is the answer, 'I have the key.' 'But are 
you sure you have the key?' 'Oh, yes; I am sure I have, here it is; try it for 
yourself, and do not be such a coward, man; try it.' The man tries the key. 'It 
will not turn,' says he.' Let me try,' says his friend. He puts it in the lock, 
but lo, it will not turn! 'God.' he-shrieks, 'it's the wrong key!' Now, sirs, 
will ye go back to your game again? No, now they will strain every nerve, and 
labour with might and main to open the door, only to find that it is all too 
late for them to escape. So many of our hearers are saying, 'Oh, yes! what the 
preacher says is well enough, but you know we can repent whenever we like; we 
have power to obtain the grace of God whenever we please; we know the way; have 
we not been told over and over again simply to trust Christ?and we can do that 
whenever we pleasewe are safe enough.' Ah, but suppose you cannot believe 
whenever you phase? Suppose the day shall come when you shall call upon the 
Lord, and he will not answer; when you shall stretch out your hand, but no man 
shall regard! Suppose you should one day cry, 'Lord, Lord, open to us,' and the 
answer should be, 'I never knew you, depart, ye cursed!' O procrastinator, if 
you think that you can repent now, why do you not repent now? You believe that 
you have full power to do so! Oh, do it, do it, and do not trifle with that 
power, lest when the power is gone, you find, too late, that in one sense you 
never possessed it! 


## Censoriousness-Who Most Guilty of

Pedley, who was a well-known natural simpleton, was wont to say, 'God help the 
fool.' None are more ready to pity the folly of others than those who have a 
small share of wit themselves. 'There is no love among Christians' cries the 
man who is destitute of true charity. 'Zeal has vanished,' exclaims the idle 
talker. 'O for more consistency,' groans out the hypocrite. 'We want more vital 
godliness,' protests the false pretender. As in the old legend, the wolf 
preached against sheep-stealing, so very many hunt down those sins in others 
which they gladly shelter in themselves. 


## Change: Love of

It will be found that they are the weakest-minded and the hardest-hearted men 
that most love variety and change; for the weakest-minded are those who both 
wonder most at things new, and digest worst things old; in so far that 
everything they have lies rusty, and loses lustre from want of use. Neither do 
they make any stir among their possessions, nor look over them to see what may 
be made of them, nor keep any great store, nor are householders with 
storehouses of things new and old; but they catch at the new-fashioned 
garments, 
and let the moth and thief look after the rest; and the hardest-hearted men are 
those that least feel the endearing and binding power of custom, and hold on by 
no cords of affection to any shore, but drive with the waves that cast up mire 
and dirt.: John Raskin. 


## Charity: Spies Out the Good Points in All

Mr. Jameson says, 'The following beautiful epilogue had a powerful effect on my 
mind;''Jesus,' says the story, 'arrived one evening at the gates of a certain 
city, and he sent his disciples forward to prepare supper while he himself, 
intent on doing good, walked through the streets into the market-place. And he 
saw, at the corner of the market, some people gathered together looking at an 
object on the ground; and he drew near to see what it might be. It was a dead 
dog with a halter round his neck, by which he appeared to have been dragged 
through the dirt; and a viler, a more abject ,a more unclean thing never met 
the eyes of man. And those who stood by looked on with abhorrence, 'Faugh!' 
said one, stopping his nose, ' it pollutes the air!' 'How long,' said another, 
'shall this foul beast offend our sight?' 'Look at his torn hide,' said a 
third, 
'one could not even cut a shoe out of it.' 'And his ears,' said a fourth, 'all 
draggled and bleeding.' 'No doubt,' said a fifth, 'he has been hanged for 
thieving.' And Jesus heard them, and looking down compassionately on the dead 
creature, he said, 'Pearls are not equal to the whiteness of his teeth.' Then 
the people turned to him with amazement, and said among themselves, 'Who is 
this? This must be Jesus of Nazareth, for only he could find something to pity 
and approve even in a dead dog.' And, being ashamed, they bowed their heads 
before him, and went each on his way.' 'I can recall at this hour the vivid, 
yet softening and pathetic, impression left on my fancy by this old Eastern 
story. It gave me pain in my conscience, for it seemed thenceforward so easy 
and 
so vulgar to say satirical things, and so much nobler to be benign and 
merciful; and I took the lesson so home that I was in great danger of falling 
into the opposite extreme: of seeking the beautiful even in the midst of the 
corrupt and the repulsive.' 


## Children: Perseverance Heeded in Teaching

In dibbling beans the old practice was to put three in each hole: one for the 
worm, one for the crow, and one to live and produce the crop. In teaching 
children, we must give line upon line, and precept upon precept, repeating the 
truth which we would inculcate, till it becomes impossible for the child to 
forget it. We may well give the lesson once expecting the child's frail memory 
to lose it; twice, reckoning that the devil, like an ill bird, will steal it; 
thrice, hoping that it will take root downward, and bring forth fruit upward to 
the glory of God. 


## Children: Their Future

In the early French revolution, the schoolboys of Bourges, from twelve to 
seventeen years of age, formed themselves into Band of Hope. They wore a 
uniform, and were taught drill. On their holidays, their flag was unfurled, 
displaying in shining letters the sentence: 'Tremelez, Tyrans, Nous 
grandirons!' (Tremble, Tyrants, we shall grow up!). Without any charge of 
spurious enthusiasm, we may, in imagination, hear the shouts of confidence and 
courage, uttered by the young Christians of the future, as they say, 'Tremble, 
enemy, w are growing up for God!'Mr. S. R. Paulson's Address at the Meeting of 
the Baptist Union, 1869. 


## Christ Jesus: the Marrow of Theology

The late venerable and godly Dr. Archibald Alexander, of Princeton, United 
States, had been a preacher of Christ for sixty years, and a professor of 
divinity for forty. He died on the 22nd October, 1851. On his death-bed, he was 
heard to say to a friend, 'Ah, my theology is reduced to this narrow compass: 
Jesus Christ came into the world to save.'


## Christ: His Eye Our Stimulus

There is a touching fact related in a history of a Highland chief, of the noble 
house of M'Gregor, who fell wounded by two balls, at the battle of Prestonpans. 
Seeing their chief fall, the clan wavered, and gave the enemy an advantage. The 
old chieftain, beholding the effect of his disaster, raised himself up on his 
elbow, while the blood gushed in streams from his wounds, and cried aloud, 'I 
am not dead, my children; I am looking at you to see you do your duty.' These 
words revived the sinking course of his brave Highlanders. There was a charm in 
the fact that they still fought under the eye of their chief. It roused them to 
put forth their mightiest energies, and they did all that human strength could 
do to turn and stem the dreadful tide of battle. And is there not a charm to 
thee, O believer, in the fact that you contend in the battle-field of life 
under 
the eye of your Savior? Wherever you are, however you are oppressed by foes, 
however exhausted by the stem strife with evil, the eye of Christ is fixed most 
lovingly upon thee. Nor is Jesus the only observer of your conduct. You are 
also 
'a spectacle unto angels.' You are 'compassed about by a cloud of witnesses.' 
Human and angelic minds, animated, the good by love, and the evil by hate, are 
the spectators of your deeds. Thus is the theatre of your life made sublime; 
and 
you contend for salvation under circumstances sufficiently grand, and with 
results before you sufficiently awful, to arouse your latent powers, and to 
stimulate you to strive bravely, vigorously, and perseveringly even unto 
victory.: G. Wise. 


## Christ: Love of Proved

In the French revolution, a young man was condemned to the guillotine, and shut 
up in one of the prisons. He was greatly loved by many, but there was one who 
loved him more than all put together. How know we this? It was his own father, 
and the love he bore his son was proved in this way: when the lists were 
called, the father, whose name was exactly the same as the son cried to the 
name, and the father rode in the gloomy tumbril out to the place of execution, 
and his head rolled beneath the axe instead of his son's, a victim to mighty 
love. See here an image of the love of Christ to sinners; for thus Jesus died 
for the ungodly. 


## Christ: Our Only Hope

On a huge cross by the side of an Italian highway hung a hideous caricature of 
the Beloved of our souls, who poured out his life for our redemption. Out of 
reverence to the living Christ we turned aside, disgusted from the revolting 
image, but not until we had espied the words Spes Unica, in capitals over its 
head. Here was truth emblazoned on an idol. Yes, indeed, Jesus, our now 
exalted, but once crucified Lord is the sole and only hope of man. Assuredly, O 
Lord Jesus, thou art spes unica to our soul. 'Other refuge have we none, Hangs 
our helpless soul on thee.' We found this diamond in the mire of superstition: 
does it sparkle any the less? 


## Christ: Our Only Rest

My heart can have no rest, unless it leans on Jesus Christ wholly, and then it 
feels his peace. But I am apt to leave my resting-place, and when I ramble from 
it, my heart will quickly brew up mischief. Some evil temper now begins to 
boil, or some care would fain perplex me, or some idol wants to please me, or 
some deadness or some lightness creeps upon my spirit, and communion with my 
Saviour is withdrawn. When these thorns stick in my flesh, I do not try, as 
heretofore, to pick them out with my own needle, but carry all complaints to 
Jesus, casting every care upon him. His office is to save, and mine to look for 
help.John Berridge. 


## Christ: Riches of His Grace

Sir Richard Whittington entertained King Henry V. at the Guildhall with 
unparalleled magnificence. The braziers in the hall were supplied with logs of 
rare, sweet-scented wood for fuel; but they burned with a far more delicious 
fragrance when the noble citizen bringing forth the king's bonds for the 
repayment of the large sum of £60,000 (equal to £900,000 now), thrust them into 
the blazing fire, saying, that he was too happy thus to discharge the king's 
obligations. When the handwriting which was against us is put away, we receive 
a choice mercy indeed. That blessed fire of Christ's most fragrant sufferings 
hath consumed all his people's sins; this is royal bounty with an emphasis. 


## Christ: Sympathy with His People

'If,' says Augustine, 'a man should come up to embrace thee, to kiss and honour 
thee upward, and beneath with a pair of shoes beaten full of nails, tread upon 
thy bare foot; the head shall despise the honor done unto it, and for the foot 
that smarteth, say, Why treadest thou upon me? So when feigned gospellers honor 
Christ our Head, sitting in heaven, and oppress his members on earth, the Head 
shall speak for the feet that smart, and say, Why treadest thou on me?' Paul 
had a zeal toward God, but he did tread upon Christ's feet on earth, for whom 
the Head crieth forth of heaven, 'Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?' 
Although Christ sitteth on the right hand of his Father, yet lieth he on earth; 
he suffereth all calamities here on earth, he is many times evil entreated here 
on earth.'Bernard Gilpin. 


## Christ: the Preacher's Great Theme

The best sermon is that which is fullest of Christ, A Welsh minister, when 
preaching at the chapel of my dear brother Jonathan George, was saying that 
Christ was the sum and substance of the gospel, and he broke out into the 
following story:A young man had been preaching in the presence of a venerable 
divine, and after he had done, he foolishly went to the old minister and 
enquired, 'What do you think of my sermon, sir?' 'A very poor sermon indeed,' 
said he. 'A poor sermon!' said the young man, 'it took me a long time to study 
it.' 'Ay, no doubt of it.' 'Why, then, do you say it was poor; did you not 
think my explanation of the text to be accurate?' 'Oh, yes,' said the old 
preacher, 'very correct indeed.' 'Well, then, why do you say it is a poor 
sermon? Didn't you think the metaphors were appropriate, and the arguments 
conclusive?' 'Yes, they were very good, as far as that goes, but still it was a 
very poor sermon.' 'Will you tell me why you think it a poor sermon?' 
'Because,' 
said he,' there was no Christ in it.' 'Well,' said the young man, 'Christ was 
not in the text; we are not to be preaching Christ always, we must preach what 
is in the text.' So the old man said, 'Don't you know, young man, that from 
every town, and every village, and every little hamlet in England, wherever it 
may be, there is a road to London?' 'Yes,' said the young man. 'Ah!' said the 
old divine, 'and so from every text in Scripture there is a road to the 
metropolis of the Scriptures, that is Christ. And, my dear brother, your 
business is, when you get to a text, to say, 'Now, what is the road to Christ?' 
and then preach a sermon, running along the road towards the great 
metropolisChrist. And,' said he, 'I have never yet found a text that had not a 
plain and direct road to Christ in it; and if ever I should find one that has 
no 
such road, I will make a road, I would go over hedge and ditch but I would get 
at my Master, for a sermon is neither fit for the land nor yet for the 
dunghill, 
unless there is a savor of Christ in it.' 


## Christ: the Preacher's Theme

The pulpit is intended to be a pedestal for the cross, though, alas! even the 
cross itself, it is to be feared, is sometimes used as a mere pedestal for the 
preacher's fame. We may roll the thunders of eloquence, we may dart the 
coruscations of genius, we may scatter the flowers of poetry, we may diffuse 
the light of science, we may enforce the precepts of morality, from the pulpit; 
but if we do not make Christ the great subject of our preaching, we have 
forgotten our errand, and shall do no good. Satan trembles at nothing but the 
cross: at this he does tremble; and if we would destroy his power, and extend 
that holy and benevolent kingdom, which is righteousness, peace, and joy in the 
Holy Ghost, it must be by means of the CROSS.J. A. James. 


## Christ: the Soul's Only Defence

There is an ancient parable which says that the dove once made a piteous 
complaint to her fellow birds, that the hawk was a most cruel tyrant, and was 
thirsting for her blood. One counseled her to keep belowbut the hawk can stoop 
for its prey; another advised her to soar aloftbut the hawk can mount as high 
as she. A third hade her hide herself of the woods, but alas! these are the 
hawk's own estates, where he holds his court. A fourth recommended her to keep 
in the town, but there man hunted her, and she feared that her eyes would be 
put out by the cruel falconer to make sport for the hawk. At last one told her 
to rest herself in the clefts of the rock, there she would be safe, violence 
itself could not surprise her there. The meaning is easy; reader, do not fail 
to 
catch it, and to act upon it. The dove is thy poor defenceless soul. Satan is 
thy cruel foe; wouldst thou not escape from him? Thy poverty cannot protect 
thee, for sin can stoop to the poor man's level and devour him in the cottage, 
and drag him to hell from a hovel. Thy riches are no security, for Satan can 
make these a snare to thee, and if thou shouldst mount so high, the bird of 
prey 
can follow thee and rend thee in pieces! The busy world with all its cares 
cannot shelter thee, for here it is that the great enemy is most at home; he is 
the prince of this world, and seizes men who find their joys therein as easily 
as a kite lays hold upon a sparrow. Nor can retirement secure you, for there 
are 
sins peculiar to quietude, and hell's dread vulture soars over lonely solitudes 
to find defenceless souls, and rend them in pieces. There is but one defence. O 
may you and I fly to it at once! Jesus was wounded for sin; faith in him saves 
at once and for ever. 


## Christ: to Be Followed above All

In a letter of Abelard to Eloisa, the following paragraph occurs:'I will be no 
philosopher, if so be I must needs fight against St. Paul; I will be no 
Aristotle, if so be I be separated from Christ.' If all students were thus 
resolved to hold with the great Teacher at all hazards, we should not see such 
frequent victims of 'philosophy, falsely so called.' Unlettered ignorance is a 
great evil, but learned ignorance is worse, and such is all learning which 
decoys the heart from Jesus. 


## Christ: Trophies of His Power

Before many a Popish shrine on the Continent one sees exhibited a great variety 
of crutches, together with wax models of arms, legs, and other limbs. These are 
supposed to represent the cures wrought by devotion at that altar; the 
memorials of the healing power of the saint. Poor miserable superstition all of 
it, and yet what a reminder to the believer in Jesus as to his duty and his 
privilege! Having pleaded at the feet of Jesus, we have found salvation; have 
we 
remembered to record this wonder of his hand? If we hung up memorials of all 
his 
matchless grace, what crutches, and bandages, and trophies of every sort should 
we pile together! Temper subdued, pride humbled, unbelief slain, sin cast down, 
sloth ashamed, carelessness rebuked. The cross has healed all manner of 
diseases, and its honors should be proclaimed with every rising and setting 
sun. 


## Christ: Welcoming Sinners

We are told that in stormy weather it is not unusual for small birds to be 
blown out of sight of land on to the sea. They are often seen by voyagers out 
of 
their reckoning and far from the coast, hovering over the masts on weary wings 
as if they wanted to alight and rest themselves, but fearing to do so. A 
traveler tells us that on one occasion, a little lark, which followed the ship 
for a considerable distance, was at last compelled through sheer weariness to 
alight. He was so worn out as to be easily caught. The warmth of the hand was 
so agreeable to him that he sat down on it, burying his little cold feet in his 
feathers, and looking about with his bright eye not in the least afraid, and as 
if feeling assured that he had been cast amongst good kind people whom he had 
no occasion, to be so backward in trusting. A touching picture of the soul who 
is aroused by the Spirit of God and blown out of its own reckoning by the winds 
of conviction; and the warm reception which the weary little bird received at 
the hands of the passengers conveys but a faint idea of that welcome which will 
greet the worn-out, sin-sick souls who will commit themselves into the hands of 
the only Savior. 


## Christ: with Us in Trial

One thing which contributed to make Caesar's soldier invincible was their 
seeing him always take his share of danger, and never desire any exemption from 
labor and fatigue. We have a far higher incentive in the war for truth and 
goodness when we consider him who endured such contradiction of sinners against 
himself, 


## Christian: a Royal Personage

A poor but pious woman called upon two elegant young ladies, who, regardless of 
her poverty, invited her to sit down with them in the drawing-room, and entered 
into conversation with her upon religious subjects. While thus employed, their 
brother, a dashing youth, by chance entered, and appeared astonished to see his 
sisters thus engaged. One of them instantly exclaimed, 'Brother, don't be 
surprised; this is a king's daughter, though she has not yet put on her fine 
clothes.'Pioneer. 


## Christian: Manifest by His Life

Longfellow in his Hiawatha sings of: 'The pleasant watercourses, You could 
trace them through the valley, By the rushing in the Spring-time, By the alders 
in the Summer, By the white fog in the Autumn, By the black line in the 
Winter.' 
So traceable are the lives of really gracious men and women. They are not 
solicitous to be observed, but the gracious 'signs following' are sure to 
reveal them. Like their Master they cannot be hid. 


## Christian: Professor Cannot Be Neutral

It appears that Themistocles, when a boy, was full of spirit and fire, quick of 
apprehension, naturally inclined to bold attempts, and likely to make a great 
statesman. His hours of leisure and vacation he spent not, like other boys, in 
idleness and play, but he was always, inventing and composing declamations, the 
subjects of which were cither impeachments or defenses of some of his 
schoolfellows; so that his master would often say, 'Boy, you will be nothing 
common or indifferent, you will either be a blessing or a curse to the 
community.' So remember, you who profess to be followers of the Lord Jesus, 
that to yon indifference is impossible; you must bless the church and the world 
by your holiness, or you will curse them both by your hypocrisy and 
inconsistency. In the visible church it is most true that 'no man liveth unto 
himself, and no man dieth unto himself.' 


## Christian: What He Should Be

A child of God should be a visible Beatitude, for joy and happiness, and a 
living Doxology, for gratitude and adoration. 


## ChristianìS Life: the Power of

There is a spot on the Lago Lugano, where the song of the nightingale swells 
sweetly from the thickets on the shore in matchless rush of music, so that the 
oar lies motionless and the listeners hushed into silent enhancement; yet we 
did not see a single bird, the orchestra was as hidden as the notes were clear. 
Such is a virtuous life, and such the influence of modest holiness; the voice 
of excellence is heard when the excellent themselves are not seen. 


## Church: Her Glory in Tribulation

One will at a certain hour of a bright day be surprised to see a rainbow making 
an entire circle, surrounding the fall like a coronet of gems, or a ring set 
with all the brilliants of the jeweller. Every hue is there.  We saw two such 
bows, one within the other, and we fancied that we discovered traces of a 
third. We had looked upon such a sight but once before, and were greatly 
delighted with 'that arch of light, boom of the spray, and colored by the sun.' 
It was a fair vision to gaze upon, and reminded us 'of the mystic rainbow, 
which 
the seer of Patmos beheld, which was round about the throne, for it strikes us 
that it was seen by John as a complete circle, of which we see but the half on 
earth; the upper arch of manifest glory we rejoice to gaze upon, but the lower 
and foundation arch of the eternal purpose, upon which the visible display of 
grace is founded, is reserved for our contemplation in another world. When we 
read in the first verse of the tenth chapter of Revelation,' I saw another 
mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud: and a rainbow was 
upon 
his head,' it greatly assists the imagination to conceive of a many-colored 
circlet, rather than a semicircle. We lingered long watching the flashing 
crystal, dashed and broken upon a hundred craggy rocks, and tossed into the air 
in sheets of foam, to fall in wreaths of spray; we should not have tired for 
hours if we could have tarried to admire the harmonious hues of that wheel 
within a wheel,'Of colours changing from the splendid rose, To the pale 
violet's 
dejected hue;' but we were on a journey, and were summoned to advance. As we 
mounted our mule and rode silently down the pass, mid the pine forests and the 
over-hanging mountains, we ompared the little stream to the church of God, 
which 
in peaceful times flows on like a village brook, quiet and obscure, blessed and 
blessing others, but yet little known or considered by the sons of men. Abana 
and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, .re greater than all the waters of Israel, and 
the proud ones of the earth despise that brook which flows 'hard by the oracle 
of God,' because her waters go softly and in solitary places; but when the 
church advances over the steeps of opposition, and is dashed adown the crags of 
persecution, then, in her hour of sorrow, her glory is revealed. Then she lifts 
up her voice, like the sea, and roars as a boiling torrent, quickening her pace 
till that mighty river, the river Kishon, sweeps not with such vehemence of 
power. Her sons and daughters are led to the slaughter, and her blood is cast 
abroad, like the foam of the waters, but onward she dashes with irresistible 
energy, fearing no leap of peril; and then it is that the eternal God glorifies 
her with the rainbow of his everlasting grace, makes the beauty of her holiness 
to shine forth, and, in the patience of the saints, reveals a heavenly 
radiance, 
which all men behold with astonishment. The golden age of true religion is the 
martyr period; war breeds heroes, and suffering unto blood in striving against 
sin draws forth men of whom the world is not worthy. So far from enduring loss 
by opposition, it is then that the cause of God receives its coronation. The 
rainbow of the divine presence in the fullness of majesty encircles the chosen 
people when tribulation, affliction, and distress break them, as the stream is 
broken by the precipitous rocks adown which it boldly casts itself, that its 
current may advance in its predestined channel. When, at any time, our 
forebodings foretell the coming of evil times for the church, let us remember 
that before the Spirit revealed to the beloved disciple the terrible beasts, 
the 
thundering trumpets, the falling stars, and the dreadful vials, he bade him 
mark 
with attention that the covenant rainbow was round about the throne. All is 
well, for God is true. 


## Church: to Be Forged

When Oliver Cromwell was about to turn the Members of Parliament out of their 
chamber, he pointed to the mace, and cried, 'Take away that bauble!' When HE 
shall come, who will effectually purge the church, he will say much the same of 
many ecclesiastical ornaments, now held in high repute. Gowns, and altars, and 
banners, and painted windows, will all go at one sweep with 'take away those 
baubles.' Nor will the rhetorical embellishments and philosophies of modern 
pulpits be any more tenderly dealt with. 'Take away this bauble' will be the 
signal for turning many a treasured folly into perpetual contempt. 


## Circumstances

Horace Smith truly and wittily remarks, 'If a letter were to be addressed to 
that most influential word, circumstances, concluding thus: 'I am, sir, your 
very obedient humble servant,' the greater part of the world might subscribe it 
without deviating from the strictest veracity.' 


## Coming to Christ: as a Sinner

A great monarch was accustomed on certain set occasions for all the beggars of 
the city. Around him were placed beggars, all clothed in rich apparel; the 
beggars sat at the table in their rags of poverty. Now it came to pass, a 
certain day, one of the courtiers had spoiled his silken apparel, so that he 
dared not put it on, and he felt, 'I cannot go to the king's feast to-day, for 
my robe is foul.' He sat weeping till the thought struck him, 'To-morrow when 
the king holds his feast, some will come as courtiers happily decked in their 
beautiful array, but others will come and be made quite as welcome who will be 
dressed in rags. Well, well,' said he, 'so long as I may see the king's face, 
and sit at the royal table, I will enter among the beggars.' So without 
mourning because he had lost his silken habit, he put on the rags of a beggar, 
and he saw the king's face as well as if he had worn his scarlet and fine 
linen. 
My soul has done this many a time, when her evidences of salvation have been 
dim; and I bid you do the same when you are in like case: only do come with 
simple faith to him, and you shall receive joy and peace. 


## Coming to Christ: as a Sinner (2)

In one of the coal-pits of the north, while a considerable number of the miners 
were dawn below, the top of the pit fell in, and the shaft was completely 
blocked up. Those who were in the mine, gathered to a spot where the last 
remains of air could be breathed. There they sat and sang and prayed after the 
lights had gone out because the air was unable to support the flame. They were 
in total darkness, but a gleam of hope cheered them when one of them said he 
had heard that there was a connection between that pit and an old pit which had 
been worked years ago. He said it was a long passage through which a man might 
get by crawling all the way, lying flat upon the ground; he would go and see if 
it were passable. The passage was very long, but they crept through it, and at 
last they came out to light at the bottom of the other shaft, and their li es 
were saved. If my present way of access to Christ as a saint is blocked up by 
doubts and fears, if I, cannot go straight up the shaft and see the light of my 
Father's face, there is an old working, the old-fashioned way by which sinners 
have gone of old, by which poor thieves go, by which harlots go. I will creep 
along it, lowly and humbly; I will go flat upon the ground. i will humble 
myself 
till I see my Lord, and cry, 'Father, I am not worthy to be called thy son, 
make 
me as one of thy hired servants, so long as I may but dwell in thy house.' In 
our very worst case of despondency we may still come to Jesus as sinners. 
'Jesus 
Christ came into the world to save sinners.' Call this to mind, and you may 
have 
hope. 


## Communion of the Saints

Communion is strength, solitude is weakness. Alone, the fine old beech yields 
to the blast, and lies prone upon the sward: in the forest, supporting each 
other, the trees laugh at the hurricane. The sheep of Jesus flock together; the 
social element is the genius of Christianity. What the circulation of the blood 
is to the human body, that the Holy Spirit is to the body of Christ which is 
the church. Now, by virtue of the one life-flood, every limb of the body holds 
fellowship with every other, and as long as life lasts that fellowship is 
inevitable. If the hand be unwashed the eye cannot refuse communion with it on 
that account; if the finger be diseased the hand cannot, by binding a cord 
around it, prevent the life-current from flowing. Nothing but death can break 
up the fellowship, you must tear away the member, or it must of necessity 
commune with the rest of the body. It is even thus in the body of Christ; no 
laws can prevent one living member of Christ from fellowship with every other, 
the pulse of living fellowship sends a wave through the whole mystical frame; 
where there is but one life, fellowship is an inevitable consequence. Yet some 
talk of restricted communion, and imagine that they can practice it. If they be 
alive unto God they may in mistaken conscientiousness deny their fellow 
Christians the outward sign of communion, but communion itself falls not under 
any rule or regulation of theirs. Tie a red tape round your thumb and let it 
decree that the whole body is out of fellowship with it; the thumb's decree is 
either ridiculously inoperative, or else it proves injurious to itself. God has 
made us one, one Spirit quickens us, and truly our fellowship is with the 
Father, and with his Son Jesus; to deny fellowship with any believer in Jesus 
is 
to refuse what you must of necessity give, and to deny in symbol what you must 
inevitably render in reality. 


## Communion with Christ: Its Influence on Our Views

When you have been sitting in a well-lighted room and are suddenly called into 
the outer darkness, how black it seems; and thus when a mam has dwelt in 
communion with God, sin becomes exceeding sinful, and the darkness in which the 
world lieth appears like tenfold night. 


## Communion with Christ: Joy of

No sooner do you pass the brow of the St. Gothard pass, on your way to Italy, 
than you perceive that, beyond all question, you are on the sunny side of the 
Alps. The snow lying there is nothing in comparison to the vast accumulation 
upon the Swiss side of the summit, the wind ceases to be sharp and cutting, and 
a very few minutes ride brings you into a balmy air which makes you forget that 
you are so greatly elevated above the sea level. There is a very manifest 
difference between the southern side and the bleak northern aspect. He who 
climbs above the cares of the world, and turns his face to his God, has found 
the sunny side of life. The world's side of the hill is chill and freezing to a 
spiritual mind, but the Lord's presence gives a warmth of joy which turns 
winter into summer. Some pilgrims to heaven appear never to have passed the 
summit of religious difficulty; they are still toiling over the Devil's Bridge, 
or loitering at Andermatt, or plunging into the deep snowdrifts of their own 
personal unworthiness, ever learning, but never coming to a full knowledge of 
the truth; they have not attained to a comfortable perception of the glory, 
preciousness, and all-sufficiency of the Lord Jesus, and therefore abide amid 
the winter of heir doubts and fears. If they had but faith to surmount ,heir 
spiritual impediments, how changed would everything become! It is fair 
travelling with a sunny land smiling before your eyes, especially when you 
retain a grateful remembrance of the bleak and wintry road which you have 
traversed; but it is sorry work to be always stopping on the Swiss side of the 
mountain. How is it that so many do this? 


## Communion with God: Power of

In driving piles, a machine is used by which a huge weight is lifted up and 
then made to fall upon the head of the pile. Of course the higher the weight is 
lifted the more powerful is the blow which it gives when it descends. Now, if 
we would tell upon our age and come down upon society with ponderous blows, we 
must see to it that we are uplifted as near to God as possible. All our power 
will depend upon the elevation of our spirits. Prayer, meditation, devotion, 
communion, are like a windlass to wind us up aloft; it is not lost time which 
we spend in such sacred exercises, for we are thus accumulating force, so that 
when we come down to our actual labour for God, we shall descend with an energy 
unknown to those to whom communion is unknown. 


## Conscience: Hardening

It is a very terrible thing to let conscience begin to grow hard, for it soon 
chills into northern iron and steel. It is like the freezing of a pond. The 
first film of ice is scarcely perceptible; keep the water stirring and you will 
prevent the frost from hardening it; but once let it film over and remain 
fiuiet, the glaze thickens over the surface, and it thickens still, and at last 
it is so firm that a wagon might he drawn over the solid ice. So with 
conscience, it films over gradually, until at last it becomes hard and 
unfeeling, and is not crushed even with ponderous loads of iniquity. 


## Consecration

Travelers have said that they have discovered gardens of Solomon, which were of 
old enclosed as private places wherein the king walked in solitude; and they 
have also found wells of a most deliciously cold water, dexterously covered, so 
that no person unacquainted with the stone in the wall, which either revolved 
or slid away with a touch, could have found the entrance to the spring. At the 
foot of some lofty range of mountains a reservoir received the cooling streams 
which flowed from melted snows; this reservoir was carefully guarded and shut 
out from all common entrance, in order that the king alone might enter there, 
and might refresh himself' during the scorching heats. Such is the Christian's 
heart. It is a spring shut up, a fountain sealed, a garden reserved for Jesus 
only. O come, Great King, and enjoy thy possessions!


## Consistency

Milton excuses Oliver Cromwell's want of bookish application in his youth 
thus:'It did not become that hand to wax soft in literary ease which was to be 
inured to the use of arms and hardened with asperity; that right arm to be 
softly wrapped up among the birds of Athens, by which thunderbolts were soon 
afterwards to be hurled among the eagles which emulate the sun.' Carnal ease 
and worldly wisdom are not becoming in the soldier of Jesus Christ. He has to 
wrestle against principalities and powers, and has need of sterner qualities 
than those which sparkle in the eyes of fashion or adorn the neck of elegance. 


## Consistency (2)

'I shall not attend Sabbath school any more,' said a young girl to one of her 
class. 'Why not?' asked her friend. 'Because my mother is going to send me to 
the dancing school, and I think it very inconsistent to attend both at the same 
time.' Children are sure to reason, if thetr parents do not.' Lead us not into 
temptation,' let children pray; for are they not often led there? 


## Contentment

Making a day's excursion from Botzen in the Tyrol, we went along the very 
narrowest of road's, mere alleys, to which our country lanes would be turnpike 
roads. Well, you may be sure that we did not engage an ordinary broad carriage, 
for that would have found the passage as difficult as the needle's eye to the 
camel; but our landlord had a very narrow chaise for us, just the very thing 
for threading those fourfeet passages. Now, I must make you hear the moral of 
it, you fretful little gentlemen. When you have a small estate, you must have 
small wheels, and by contentment suit your carriage to your road. 'Not so 
easy,' 
say you? 'Very necessary to A Christian,' say I. 


## Conversation

In Andrew Fuller's diary is the following entry:'Jan. 3, 1782. This afternoon 
being on a visit, as I stepped aside from the company, I overheard one of them 
saying, 'I love Mr. Fuller's company, it is so diverting,' This expression 
moved me much. Oh, wretch that I am! Is this to have my speech seasoned with 
grace? O Lord, forgive me! Some humbling thoughts for the above in prayer.' 
'4th. Tender this morning in remembering the above circumstance. Lord, make me 
more spiritual in time to come.' 


## Conversation: Edifying

The Spaniards in Chili believed that no water was so wholesome or of so 
delicate a flavour as that which flowed through veins of gold; certainly no 
conversation is so edifying to the hearers as that which pours forth from a 
heart stored with sacred knowledge, sanctified experience, devout 
contemplations, and such like precious treasures. 


## Conversion (Sudden): Not All Genuine

Fish sometimes leap out of the water with great energy, but it would be foolish 
to conclude that they have left the liquid element for ever, in a moment they 
are swimming again as if they had never forsaken the stream; indeed, it was but 
a fly that tempted them aloft, or a sudden freak, the water is still their 
home, sweet home. When we see long-accustomed sinners making a sudden leap at 
religion, we may not make too sure that they are converts; perhaps some gain 
allures them, or sudden excitement stirs them, and if so they will be back 
again at their old sins. Let us hope well, but let us not commend too soon, 


## Conversion: a Complete Surrender

When Henry VIII. had determined to make himself head of the English Church, he 
insisted upon it that convocation should accept his headship without limiting 
and modifying clauses. He refused to entertain any compromises, and vowed that 
'he would have no tantums' as he called them. Thus when a sinner parleys with 
his Savior he would fain have a little of the honor of his salvation, he would 
save alive some favorite sin, he would fain amend the humbling terms of 
gracebut there is no help for it, Jesus will be all in all, and the sinner 
must be nothing at all. The surrender must be complete, there must be no 
tantums, but the heart must, without reserve submit to the sovereignty of the 
Redeemer. 


## Conversion: a Radical Change

I passed by a piece of common which some lord of the manor or other had been 
enclosing, as those rascals always will if they can, to rob the poor of their 
rights, and filch every morsel of green grass upon which we may freely plant 
our feet; but I noticed that the enclosers had only railed it round, but had 
not 
dug it up, nor ploughed it, nor planted it; and though they had cut down the 
gorse, it was coming up again; of course it would, for it was a common still, 
and a bit of fence or rail could not alter it; the furze would come peeping up, 
and ere long the enclosure would be as wild as the heath outside. But this is 
not God's way of working. When God encloseth a heart that has laid common with 
sin, does he cut down the thorns and the briers and then plant fir trees? 
(Isaiah 4:13.) No, no; but he so changeth the soil, that from the ground 
itself, 
from its own vitality, there spontaneously starts up the fir tree and the 
myrtle. This is a most wonderful result. You take a man and leave him at heart 
the same godless man. You mend his habits; you make him go to church, or to the 
meeting-house; you clothe him; you break his wine bottle; you rinse his mouth 
out, so that he does not talk so filthily; and altogether you say, 'He's now a 
respectable man.' Ah! but if these outward respectabilities and rightnesses are 
only skin deep, you have done nothing. At least, what you have done is no great 
wonder; there is nothing in it to be proud of. But suppose this man can be so 
changed, that just as freely as he was wont to curse he now delights to pray, 
and just as heartily as he hated religion he now finds pleasure in it, and just 
as earnestly as he sinned he now delights to be obedient to the Lord; ah! then, 
this is a wonder, a miracle which mat cannot accomplish, a marvel which only 
the 
grace of God can work, and which gives to God his highest glory. 


## Conviction: of Sin

There is something to be learned from the conduct of the Papists to our sires. 
If any poor wretch recanted and so escaped the fire, they were accustomed to 
make him carry a fagot at the next burning, as if to let him see what he had 
escaped, and make him confess what he had deserved. Depend upon it, conviction 
of sin is much like this carrying of the fagot. Well do I remember when I felt 
the sentence of death within me, and trembled lest it should be executed; my 
conscience was a minor hell, a fagot of the pile of Tophet. But, blessed be 
God, we are thus judged and sentenced in ourselves that we may not be condemned 
with the world. We bear the fagot that we may not be burned with it 


## Corruptions:  Hated by the Saints

When Venice was in the hands of the Austrians, those alien tyrants swarmed in 
every quarter; but the Venetians hated them to the last degree, and showed 
their enmity upon all occasions. When the Austrian officers sat down at any of 
the tables in the square of St. Mark, where the Venetians delight on summer 
evenings to eat their ices and drink their coffee, the company would 
immediately 
rise and retire, showing by their withdrawal that they abhorred their 
oppressors. After this fashion will every true Christian treat his inbred sins; 
he will not be happy under their power, nor tolerate their dominion, nor show 
them favor. If he cannot expel them, he will not indulge them. 


## Corruptions: Hard to Die

A cat once sprang at my lips while I was talking, and bit me savagely. My 
friend in whose house it occurred, decreed that the poor creature should die. 
The sentence he executed personally, to the best of his ability, and threw the 
carcass away. To his surprise, the cat walked into the house the next day. 
Often and often have I vowed death to some evil propensity, and have fondly 
dreamed that the sentence was fulfilled, but alas! in weaker moments I have had 
sad cause to know that the sinful tendency still survived. 


## Corruptions: Indulgence of

The man of the world in the olden time bowed to the fallen statue of Jupiter, 
by way of bespeaking the favour of the god in the event of his being again 
lifted on his pedestal What are those provisions for the flesh, which too many 
Christians so readily make, but a kind of homage to the old man whom they 
profess to have renounced? 


## Corruptions: Overcome by Grace

My gardeners were removing a large tree which grew near a wall, and as it would 
weaken the wall to stub up the roots, it was agreed that the stump should 
remain in the ground. But how were we to prevent the stump from sprouting, and 
so disarranging the gravel-walk. The gardener's prescription, was, to cover it 
with a layer of salt. I mused awhile, and thought that the readiest way to keep 
down my eversprouting corruptions in future would be to sow them well with the 
salt of grace. O Lord, help me so to do. 


## Corruptions: Overcome Gradually

When Sir Christopher Wren was engaged in demolishing the ruins of old St. 
Paul's in order to make room for his new cathedral, he used a battering ram 
with 
which thirty men continued to beat upon a part of the wall for a whole day. The 
workmen, not discerning any immediate effect, thought this a waste of time; but 
Wren, who knew that the internal motion thus communicated must be operating, 
encouraged them to persevere. On the second day, the wall began to tremble at 
the top, and fell in a few hours. If our prayers and repentances do not appear 
to overcome our corruptions, we must continue still to use these gracious 
battering-rams, for in due time by faith in Jesus Christ the power of evil 
shall be overthrown. Lord, enable me to give hearty blows by the power of thy 
Holy Spirit until the gates of hell in my soul shall be made to totter and 
fall. 


## Corruptions: Seen Even in Solitude

George Shadfoed wrote:: 'One day a friend took me to see a hermit in the woods. 
After some difficulty we found his hermitage, which was a little place like a 
hog-sty, built of several pieces of wood, covered with bark of trees, and his 
bed consisted of dry leaves. There was a narrow beaten path about twenty or 
thirty yards in length by the side of it, where he frequently walked to 
meditate.' 'If one offered him food, he would take it, but if money was offered 
him, he would be angry. If anything was spoken which he did not like, he broke 
out into a violent passion. He had lived in this cell seven cold winters, and 
after all his prayers, counting his beads, and separating from the rest of 
mankind, still corrupt nature was all alive within him.' Alas! alas! what will 
it avail us whether we are in England or Ireland, Scotland or America; whether 
we live amongst mankind, or retire into a hermitage, if we still carry with us 
our own hell, our corrupt evil tempers? Without a new heart and a right spirit, 
no condition can deliver a man from the thraldom of his sins. Neither publicity 
nor solitude avails anything until grace prevails with us. The devil can tempt 
in the wilderness as well as in the crowd. We war not hermitages but 
heavenly-mindedness. 


## Corruptions: Strengthened by Habit

In preparing places for planting new trees, the diggers found it needful in 
certain spots to lay aside the spade and use the pick-axe. In those positions 
there had been a well travelled carriage road, and hence it was hard to deal 
with it. How often, when we are under sanctifying influences, do we find 
certain hard points of our character which are not couched by ordinary 
influences; these are most probably sins in which we have become hardened, 
tracks worn by habitual transgression. We must not wonder if the severest 
processes of affliction should be tried upon us, if the pick-axe is used 
instead 
of the spade, that our stony places may yet yield soil for the plants of grace 
and holiness. 


## Corruptions: Vitality of

The yew tree appears to renew itself out of its own decay the decayed wood at 
the centre of an old yew is gradually formed into rich vegetable mould, and 
fresh verdure spring: from it. How like is this to our inward corruptions, 
which have a marvelous, vitality, so that one sin feeds upon the death of 
another. If we are cured of some one fault, we grow proud of the amendment; or 
if we perceive ourselves to be in the wrong and strive against the evil, we are 
too apt to despond and become unbelieving. So pride and unbelief, two master 
evils, grow out of the decay of other sins. 


## Courage: Strengthened by past Deliverances

Sir Francis Drake, being in a dangerous storm in the Thames, was heard to say, 
'Must I who have escaped the rage of the ocean, be drowned in a ditch?' Will 
you, experienced saints, who have passed through a world of tribulation lie 
down and die of despair, or give up your profession because you are at the 
present moment passing through some light affliction? Let your past 
preservation 
inspire you with courage and constrain you to brave all storms for Jesus' sake. 


## Covetousness

Covetous men must be the sport of Satan, for their grasping avarice neither 
lets them enjoy life nor escape from the second death. They are held by their 
own greed as surely as beasts with cords, or fish with nets, or men with 
chains. They may be likened to those foolish apes which in some countries are 
caught by narrow-necked vessels; into these corn is placed, the creatures 
thrust 
in their hands, and when they have filled them they cannot draw out their fists 
unless they let go the grain; sooner than do this they submit to be captured. 
Are covetous men then so like to beasts? Let them ponder and be ashamed. 


## Covetousness: Its Insidiousness

Beware of growing covetousness, for of all sins this is one of the most 
insidious. It is like the stream of a river. As the stream comes down from the 
land, it brings with it sand and earth, and deposits these at its mouth, so 
that by degrees, unless the conservators watch it carefully, it will block 
itself up, and leave no channel for ships of great burden. By daily deposit it 
imperceptibly creates a bar which is dangerous to navigation. Many a man when 
he begins to accumulate wealth commences at the same moment to ruin his soul, 
and the more he acquires, the more closely he blocks up his liberality, which 
is, so to speak, the very mouth of spiritual life. Instead of doing more for 
God 
he does less; the more he saves the more he wants, and the more he wants of 
this world the less he cares for the world to come. 


## Cuttle-Fish: Persons Who Resemble a

It was an old Pythagorean maxim, 'Sepiam ne edito,' 'never eat the 
cuttle-fish.' The cuttle-fish has the power of emitting a black liquid which 
dyes the water and enables it to conceal itself. Have nothing to do with those 
who darken all around them that they themselves may be unseen; honest men love 
light, and only the evil find darkness to be congenial. When an author is too 
obscure to he understood, leave him till he knows how to write; when a preacher 
is mystical, high-flown, sophistical, shun him, for it is most likely he 
labours 
to conceal some latent heresy; when a man's policy is deep and artful, flee 
from 
him, for he means no good. No deceiver or double-tongued man must be admitted 
within the circle of your confidence. Remember the advice, never eat a 
cuttle-fish. 


## Dancing

When I hear of a dancing party I fed an uneasy: about the throat, remembering 
that a far greater preacher had his head danced off in the days of our Lord. 
However pleasing the polkas of Herodias might be to Herod, they were death to 
John the Baptist. The caperings and wantonings of the ball-room are death to 
the solemn influences of our ministry, and many an ill-ended life first 
received 
its bent for evil amid the flippancies of gay assemblies met to trip away the 
hours. 


## Danger: of the Christian

When the instructed Christian sees his surroundings, he finds himself to be 
like a defenceless dove flying to her nest, while against her tens of thousands 
of arrows are levelled. The Christian life is like that dove's anxious flight, 
as it threads its way between the death-bearing shafts of the enemy, and by 
constant miracle escapes unhurt. The enlightened Christian sees himself to be 
like a traveller, standing on the narrow summit of a lofty ridge; on the right 
hand and on the left are gulfs unfathomable, yawning for his destruction; if it 
were not that by divine grace his feet are like hinds' feet, so that he is able 
to stand upon his high places, he would long ere this have fallen to his 
eternal destruction.


## Day by Day

A celebrated modern writer says, 'Take care of the minutes, and the hours will 
take care of themselves.' This is an admirable remark, and might be very 
seasonably recollected when we begin to be 'weary in well-doing,' from the 
thought of having much to do. The present moment is all we have to do with in 
any sense; the past is irrecoverable; the future is uncertain; nor is it fair 
to burthen one moment with the weight of the next. Sufficient unto the moment 
is the trouble thereof. If we had to walk a hundred miles, we should still have 
to set but one step at a time, and this process continued would infallibly 
bring 
us to our journey's end. fatigue generally begins, and is always increased, by 
calculating in a minute the exertion of hours. Thus, in looking forward to 
future life, let us recollect that we have not to sustain all its toil, to 
endure all its sufferings, or encounter all its crosses at once. One moment 
comes laden with its own little burthens, then flies, and is succeeded by 
another no heavier than the last; if one could be borne, so could another, and 
another. Even in looking forward to a single day, the spirit may sometimes 
faint from an anticipation of the duties, the labours, the trials to temper and 
patience, that may be expected. Now, this is unjustly laying the burthen of 
many thousand moments upon one.: Youth's Magazine for November, 1819.


## Day by Day (2)

A person says, 'I cannot understand bow I am to get along when I leave my 
father's house.' Why should you see it till that time comes? What if a person 
going on a journey of five years should undertake to carry provisions, and 
clothes, and gold enough to last him during the whole time, lugging them as he 
travelled, like a veritable Englishman, with all creation at his back! If he is 
wise he will supply himself at the different points where he stops. When he 
gets to London, let him buy what he needs there; when he gets to Paris, let him 
buy what he needs there; when he gets to Rome, let him buy what he needs there; 
and when he gets to Vienna, Dresden, Munich, St. Petersburg, and Canton, let 
him 
buy what he needs at these places! He will find at each of them, and all the 
other cities which he visits, whatever things he requires. Why, then, should he 
undertake to carry them around the globe with him? It would be the greatest 
folly imaginable. And as to gold, why should he load down his pockets with 
that? Let him take a circular letter of credit, which is good, yet not usable 
till he arrives at the place where he needs it. When he gets to London, let him 
present it to Baring Brothers; when he gets to Paris, let him present it to the 
Rothschilds. And as he proceeds, let him place it in the hands of the bankers 
of the various places at which he stops; and he will get the means for 
prosecuting his journey. Now God gives every believer a circular letter of 
credit for life, and says, 'Whenever you get to a place where you need 
assistance, take your letter to the Banker, and the needed assistance will be 
given you.': Henry Ward Beecher.


## Death

'Paid the debt of nature.' No; it is not paying a debt; it is rather like 
bringing a note to the bank to obtain solid gold in exchange for it. In this 
case you bring this cumbrous body which is nothing worth, and which you could 
not wish to retain long; you lay it down, and receive for it from the eternal 
treasures: liberty, victory, knowledge, rapture.: Foster.


## Death (2)

The hour of death may be fitly likened to that celebrated picture in the 
National Gallery, of Perseus holding up the head of Medusa. That head turned 
all persons into stone who looked upon it. There is a warrior represented with 
a dart in his hand; he stands stiffened, turned into stone, with the javelin 
even in his fist. There is another with a poignard beneath his robe, about to 
stab; he is now the statue of an assassin, motionless and cold. Another is 
creeping along stealthily, like a man in ambuscade, and there he stands a 
consolidated rock; he has looked only upon that head, and he is frozen into 
stone. Such is death. What I am when death is held before me, that I must be 
for 
ever. When my spirit departs, if God finds me hymning his praise, I shall hymn 
it in heaven; if he finds me breathing out oaths, I shall follow up those oaths 
in hell.


## Death: Desired by Few

Burckhardt states, that although the Arabs are strict predestinarians, yet when 
the plague visited Medina, many of the townsmen fled to the desert, alleging as 
an excuse that although the distemper was a messenger from heaven sent to call 
them to a better world, yet being conscious of their own unworthiness, and that 
they did not merit this special mark of grace, they thought it more advisable 
to decline it for the present, and make their escape from the town. If it 
really came to the point with those of us who talk of longing for death as a 
great deliverance, should we not cling to life? It is a question perhaps more 
easily asked than answered.


## Death: Differently Viewed by Different Characters

It is a blessed thing to know the Savior, and to feel that your soul is safe. 
You have been in a ship when it entered the harbor, and you have noticed the 
different looks of the passengers as they turned their eyes ashore. There was 
one who, that he might not lose a moment's time, had got everything ready for 
landing long ago; and now he smiles and beckons to yonder party on the pier, 
who in their turn, are so eager to meet him, that they almost press over the 
margin of the quay; and no sooner is the gangway thrown across, than he has 
hold 
of the arm of one, and another is triumphant on his shoulder, and all the rest 
are leaping before and after him on their homeward way. But there is another, 
who showed no alacrity. He gazed with pensive eye on the nearer coast and 
seemed 
to grudge that the trip was over. He was a stranger going amongst strangers, 
and though sometimes during the voyage he had a momentary hope that something 
unexpected might occur, and that some friendly face might recognise him in 
regions where he was going an alien and an adventurer, no such welcoming face 
is there, and with reluctant steps he quits the vessel, and commits himself to 
the unknown country. And now that everyone else has disembarked, who is this 
unhappy man whom they have brought on deck, and whom, groaning in his heavy 
chains, they are conducting to the dreaded shore? Alas! he is a felon and a 
runaway, whom they are bringing back to take his trial there; and no wonder he 
is loath to land. Now, dear brethren, our ship is sailing fast. We shall soon 
hear the rasping of the shallows, and the commotion overhead, which bespeak the 
port in view. When it comes to that, how shall you feel? Are you a stranger, or 
a convict, or are you going home? Can you say,' I know whom I have believed'? 
Have you a Friend within the veil? And however much you may enjoy the voyage, 
and however much you may like your fellow passengers, does your heart sometimes 
leap up at the prospect of seeing Jesus as he is, and so being ever with the 
Lord?James Hamilton, D.D. 


## Death: Its Revealing Power

Today the world is like a masquerade. High carnival is being held, and men wear 
their masks and dominoes, and strut about, and we think that man a king, and 
this a mighty Oriental prince, and this a haughty Indian chief. But the time is 
over for the masque; daylight dawns; strip off your garnishings; every one of 
you put on your ordinary garments. Who goes out to the unrobing-room with 
greatest confidence Why, the man who feels that his next dress will be a far 
more glorious vestment. Who shall go to that disrobing-room with the greatest 
tremor? Why, those who feel that the splendid character they once wore will 
give place to beggary and meanness; when for robes they shall have rags; for 
riches poverty; for honor, shame; and for regal splendor, hissing and reproach. 
If any of our readers seem to be what they are not, let them be wise enough to 
think of the spade the shroud, and the silent dust; let every one among us now 
put his soul into the crucible, and as we shall test ourselves i the silence of 
the dying hour, so let us judge ourselves now.


## Death: of a Believer

Old Mr. Lyford being desired, a little before his death, to let his friends 
know in what condition his soul was, and what his thoughts were about that 
eternity to which he seemed very near, he answered with a cheerfulness suitable 
to a believer and a minister, 'I will let you know how it is with me;' and 
then, stretching out a hand that was withered and consumed with age and 
sickness: 'Here is,' said he 'the grave, the wrath of God, and devouring 
flames, 
the just punishment of sin, on the one side; and here am I, a poor sinful soul, 
on the other side; but this is my comfort, the covenant of grace which is 
established on so many sure promises, has saved me from all. There is an act of 
oblivion 5assed in heaven. I will forgive their iniquities, and their sins will 
I remember no more. This is the blessed privilege of all within the covenant, 
among whom I am one.' From T. Rogers, on 'Trouble of Mind.'


## Death: Peace in

The late Mr. Young of Jedburgh, was once visiting the death-bed of an aged 
member of his congregation, who was hourly looking for his last change. 'Well, 
my friend,' said the minister, 'how do you feel yourself to-day?' 'Very weel, 
sir,' was the calm and solemn answer, 'Very weel, but just a wee confused wi' 
the flittin'.'Children's Missionary Record for 1857.


## Death: Realized

When Bernard Gilpin was privately informed that his enemies had caused 
thirty-two articles to be drawn up against him in the strongest manner, and 
presented to Bonner, bishop of London, he said to his favorite domestic, At 
length they have prevailed against me. I am accused to the bishop of London, 
from whom there will be no escaping. God forgive, their malice, and grant me 
strength to undergo the trial.' He then ordered his servant to provide a long 
garment for him, in which he might go decently to the stake, and desired it 
might be got ready with all expedition. 'For I know not,' says he, 'how soon I 
may have occasion for it.' As soon as this garment was provided, it is said, he 
used to put it on every day, till the bishop's messengers apprehended him. It 
were well if we all thus realized to ourselves the hour of our departure. We 
ought by anticipation to sleep in our shrouds, and go to bed in our sepulchers. 
To put on our cerements now is wisdom.


## Decision for Christ

After the disgraceful defeat of the Roman, at the battle of Allia, Rome was 
sacked, and it seemed as if, at any moment, the Gauls might take the Capitol. 
Among the garrison was a young man of the Fabian family, and on a certain day 
the anniversary of a sacrifice returned, when his family had always offered 
sacrifice upon the Quirinal Hill. This hill was in the possession of the Gauls; 
but when the morning dawned, the young man took the sacred utensils of his god, 
went down from the Capitol, passed through the Gallic sentries, through the 
main body, up the hill, offered sacrifice, and came back unharmed. It was 
always 
told as a wonder among Roman legends. This is just how the Christian should act 
when decision for Christ is called for. Though he be a solitary man in the 
midst 
of a thousand opponents, let him, at the precise moment when duty calls, 
fearless of all danger, go straight to the appointed spot, do his duty, and 
remember that consequences belong to God, and not to us. I pray God that after 
this style we may witness for Christ.


## Deep Things: Understood by Experienced Men

The outlay in opening a mine is usually so great that the Spaniards say, that 
to prepare a mine one must spend another mine. To open up the hidden 
preciousness of the promises, we need a mine of experience, and to gain this 
last a man needs an inexhaustible mine of grace.


## Despondency

Colton declares that in moments of despondency Shakespeare thought himself no 
poet; and Raphael doubted his right to be called a painter. We call such 
self-suspicions morbid, and ascribe them to a hypochondriacal fit; in what 
other way can we speak of those doubts as to their saintship, which 
occasionally afflict the most eminently holy of the Lord's people!


## Despondency: Its Quick Eye for Evils

Mv friend Smith told me, that once on a time he had Mr. Jones to preach in his 
church. Smith's church holds fifteen hundred people, and is perfectly filled by 
its congregation, of this circumstance Smith is pardonably proud. When Mr. 
Jones preached, the church was quite crowded, save that three seats (not pews, 
seats for a single person each) were vacant in a front gallery. But so keen was 
Mr. Jones's eye for darks, to the oblivion of lights, that after service he 
merely said to Smith that he had remarked three seats empty in the gallery. Not 
one thought or word had he for the fourteen hundred and ninety-seven seats that 
were filled. Smith was a little mortified. But by-and-by he remembered that the 
peculiar disposition of Mr. Jones was one that would inflict condign punishment 
upon itself. Then he was sorry rather than angry. Yes, my friend, let us be 
glad if we have an eye for the lights of life, rather than for its 
darks!Autumn Holidays of a country Parson.


## Destitution: of London

We have no reason to congratulate ourselves on what we are doing, if we only 
think of the great work which still buried amid the ruins of Nineveh. In 
excavating this vas population you have as it were laid bare the head of a huge 
winged bull, until you can observe that it has a human countenance and will 
well repay you for your toils. Are you going to congratulate yourselves that 
you 
have succeed thus far? Why, there are the colossal feet, and the mighty wings, 
and all the rest of the body; all these are to be uncovered from the ruins, and 
the whole mass uplifted from the depth in which it lies imbedded. But, because 
you have don a little to bless London, and have brought a thousand, three 
thousand, ten thousand to hear the word of God, are you to sit down and say, 
'It 
is done.' What is to be done with the rest of the three millions? Where are the 
other tens of thousands who are not hearing the word? Where is the great 
outlying mass of our leviathan city? 
 


## Dignity of Christian Character: to Be Maintained


Antisthenes, the founder of the sect of the Cynics, when he was told that 
Ismenias played excellently upon the flute, answered properly enough, 'Then he 
is good for nothing else, otherwise he would not have played so well.' Such 
also was Philip's saying to his son, when, at a certain entertainment, he sang 
in a very agreeable and skilful manner, 'Are you not ashamed to sing so well?' 
Even so, when one who professes to be of the seed royal of heaven, is able to 
rival the ungodly in their cunning, worldliness, merriment, scheming, or 
extravagance, may they not blush to possess such dangerous capacities? Heirs of 
heaven have something better to do than to emulate the children of darkness.  
 


## Diligence


Select a large box and place in it as many cannon-balls as it will hold, it is 
after a fashion full, but it will hold more if smaller matters be found. Bring 
a quantity of marbles, very ,amy of these may be packed in the spaces between 
the larger globes; the box is full now, but only full in a sense, will contain 
more yet. There are interstices in abundance, .to which you may shake a 
considerable quantity of small shot, and now the chest is filled beyond all 
question, but yet there is room. You cannot put in another shot or marble, much 
less another cannon-ball, but you will find that several pounds of sand will 
slide down between the larger materials, and even then between the granules of 
sand, if you empty yonder jug there will be space for all the water, and for 
the 
same quantity several times repeated. When there is no pace for the great, 
there 
may be room for the little; where he little cannot enter, the less can make its 
way; and where the less is shut out, the least of all may find ample room and 
verge enough. Now, the diligent preacher may not be able to preach more 
sermons, 
his engagement book is crowded. He may not be able to offer more public 
prayers, 
or to search the word of God more constantly; there is as much time occupied 
with these things as could well be given to them. Still there must be stray 
moments, occasional intervals and snatches, which might hold a vast amount of 
little usefulnesses in the course of months and years. What a wealth of minor 
good, as we may think it to be, might be shaken down into the interstices of 
ten 
years' work, which might prove to be as precious in result, by the grace of 
God, 
as the greater works of the same period.. Little fishes are sweet, and these 
little works might possess in blessing what they lacked in bulk.  
 


## Discontent: Chronic with Some


'Some people are never content with their lot, let what will happen. Clouds and 
darkness are over their heads, alike whether it rain or shine. To them every 
incident is an accident, and every accident a calamity. Even when they have 
their own way, they like it no better than your way, and, indeed, consider 
their most voluntary acts as matters of compulsion. We saw a striking 
illustration the other day of the infirmity we speak of in the conduct of a 
child, about three years old. He was crying because his mother had shut the 
parlor door. 'Poor thing,' said a neighbor, compassionately, 'ye have shut the 
child out.' 'It's all the same to him,' said the mother; 'he would cry if I 
called him in and then shut the door. It is a peculiarity of that boy, that if 
he is left rather suddenly on either side of a door, he considers himself shut 
out, and rebels accordingly.' There are older children who take the same view 
of 
things.'  
 


## Disposition: Distorting


How terribly bad looking-glasses distort the countenance the man who looks into 
one of them sees his hair disheveled, his forehead smutty, his nose blotched, 
his eyes out of line, and a dozen other imaginary mischiefs. How like to those 
morbid, melancholy dispositions which pervert everything into gloom, and compel 
the most lovely characters to write bitter things against themselves! They may 
also be likened to depraved judgments, which lead men to impute deformity, to 
perfection, and to censure even innocence itself. It were well if all these 
good-for-nothing mirrors could be smashed to atoms, and the truth-reflecting 
glass of the word of God hung up in their places.  
 


## Divine Goodness: Unceasing


It is by no means pleasant when reading an interesting article in your magazine 
to find yourself pulled up short with the ominous words, 'to be continued.' Yet 
they are words of good cheer if applied to other matters. What a comfort to 
remember that the Lord's mercy and lovingkindness is to be continued! Much as 
we have experienced in the long years of our pilgrimage, we have by no means 
outlived eternal love. Providential goodness is an endless chain, a ream which 
follows the pilgrim, a wheel perpetually revolving, a star for ever shining, 
and leading us to the place here he is who was once a babe in Bethlehem. All 
the volumes which record the doings of divine grace are but part f a series to 
be continued.  
 


## Doctrines (Mysterious): to Be Believed


Those huge boulders which lie along the valley of Storo in the Tyrol, are of a 
granite unknown in the neighbourhood; they must have come from a great 
distance. Now it might be hard to explain the method by which they arrived in 
the valley, but it would be absurd to deny that they are there. Most 
unaccountable is the fact, but a very strong and stubborn fact it is, for there 
they lie, huge as houses, and yet perfectly alien to the country. There are 
truths in Scripture which puzzle us, we cannot understand their relation to 
other portions of revelation, they are mysteries, apparently alien to the 
spirit 
of other passages. What then? Suppose we cannot account for them, that does not 
alter the fact that there they are, and it would be extreme folly to deny their 
existence because they puzzle us. Rather let us find room for adoring faith 
where reason is lost in wonder.  
 


## Doctrines of Grace


Our forefathers were very fond of clipping their plants and training their 
flowers into quaint and grotesque forms; so that we read of great guns wrought 
in rosemary and sweet briers. He would have been very foolish who would have 
trembled at cannons which only shot forth flowers and darted perfume. Let the 
poor trembler who is sincerely seeking Jesus, rest assured that the seemingly 
dreadful doctrines of election and predestination are not one whit more 
terrible, and are far more sweetly fragrant.  
 


## Doctrines: Duplicate Nature of


First to the right, then to the left, the road was ever ascending but always 
twisting, and thus, by easy marches, we were able to reach the summit of the 
pass; a straight line would have been shorter for the eagle's wing, but no 
human foot could have followed it. Nobody called us inconsistent for thus 
facing about; we kept the road, and no one could complain. If we honestly 
desire 
to gain the heights of divine truth, we shall find many zigzags in the road: 
here our face will front divine sovereignty with all its lofty grandeur, anon 
we shall turn in the opposite direction, towards the frowning peaks of human 
responsibility. What matters it we appear to be inconsistent, so long as we 
keep to the high way of Scripture, which is our only safe road to knowledge 
Angels may, perhaps, be systematic divines; for men should be enough to follow 
the word of God, let its teaching wind as they may.  
 


## Doctrines: False


In 'Babbage's Economy of Manufactures,' we are told that 'some years since, a 
mode of preparing old clover an trefoil seeds, by a process called 'doctoring,' 
became se prevalent as to attract the attention of the House of Commons. By 
this process old and worthless seed was rendered in appearance equal to the 
best. One witness tried some doctored seed, and found that not above one grain 
in a hundred grew.'  
Is it not to be feared that a doctored gospel is becoming very common among us, 
and if so it is no wonder that conversions are but few. Only pure truth is 
living seed.  
 


## Doctrines: False (2)


There are no greater foes to sheep than wild dogs. In dome regions, sheep were 
no longer to be found, because these fierce creatures utterly devoured the 
flocks. The church has never had worse enemies than false teachers; infidels 
and persecutors do but mild injury to her, but her heretical preachers have 
been 
as evening wolves.  
 


## Doctrines: Not for Controversy


'A huge fragment of rock from an adjacent cliff fell upon horizontal part of 
the hill below, which was occupied by the gardens and vineyards of two 
peasants. 
It covered part of the property of each, nor could it be easily decided to whom 
the unexpected visitor belonged: but the honest rustics instead of troubling 
the gentlemen of the long robe with their dispute, wisely resolved to end it by 
each party excavating the half of the rock on his own grounds, and converting 
the whole into two useful cottages, with comfortable rooms, and cellars for 
their little stock of wine, and there they now reside with their families. 
After 
such a sort will wise men deal with the great doctrines of the gospel; they 
will 
not make them the themes of angry controversy, but of profitable use. To fight 
over a doctrine is sorry waste of time, but to live in the quiet enjoyment of 
it 
is the truest wisdom.'  
 


## Doctrines: Ultra-Calvinistic


Griffiths says that travelers in Turkey carry with them lozenges of opium, on 
which is stamped 'mash Allah,' the gift of God. Too many sermons are just such 
lozenges. Grace is preached but duty denied. Divine predestination is cried up 
but human responsibility is rejected. Such teaching ought to be shunned as 
poisonous, but those who by reason of use have grown accustomed to the 
sedative, condemn all other preaching, and cry up their opium lozenges of high 
doctrine as the truth, the precious gift of God. It is to be feared that this 
poppy-juice doctrine has sent many souls to sleep who will wake up in hell.  


## Doing Good: a Blessing to Ourselves


If we view this microcosm, the human body, we shall fin that the heart does not 
receive the blood to store it up, but while it pumps it in at one valve, it 
sen4s it forth at another The blood is always circulating everywhere, and is 
stagnant nowhere; the same is true of all the fluids in a health3 body, they 
are in a constant state of expenditure. If one ccl) stores for a few moments 
its peculiar secretion, it only retains it till it is perfectly fitted for its 
appointed use in the body; for if any cell in the body should begin to store up 
its secretion, its store would soon become the cause of inveterate disease; 
nay, the organ would soon lose the power to secrete at all, if it did not give 
forth its products. The whole b1 the human system lives by giving. The eye 
cannot say to the foot, I have no need of thee, and will not guide thee; for if 
it does not perform its watchful office, the whole man will be in the ditch, 
and 
the eye will be covered with mire. If the members refuse to contribute to the 
general stock, the whole body will become poverty-stricken, and be given up to 
the bankruptcy of death. Let us learn, then, from the analogy of nature, the 
great lesson, that to get, we must give; that to accumulate, we must scatter; 
that to make ourselves happy, we must make others happy; and that to get good 
and become spiritually vigorous, we must do good, and seek the spiritual good 
of 
others.  
 


## Double-Mindedness


Faraday notes that whilst at breakfast at Liangollen, he heard a Welsh harper 
playing in very excellent style, and he adds, 'wishing to gratify myself with a 
sight of the interesting bard I went to the door and beheld: The boots! I must 
confess I was sadly disappointed and extremely baulked.' It is no small 
stumbling-block to souls when they observe that professors who preach and talk 
like men inspired, live as meanly as worldlings themselves.  
 


## Doubts: Foolish


A Christian once, in doubt and discouragement, considered the darkness that 
overspread her soul as a proof that she was finally cast away. She stumbled 
over mole-hills when she should have been removing mountains. To an old 
minister 
who was trying to comfort her, with impassioned emphasis she said, 'Oh! I'm 
dead, dead! twice dead, and plucked up by the roots!' After a pause, he 
replied, 'Well, sitting in my study the other day, I heard a sudden scream: 
'John's in the well! John's fallen into the well!' Before I could reach the 
spot, I heard the sad and mournful cry, 'John's dead: poor little Johnny's 
dead!' Bending over the curb, I called out, 'John, are you dead?' 'Yes, 
grandfather,' replied John, 'I'm dead.' I was glad to hear it from his own 
mouth.'  
Many doubts are so absurd that the only way to combat them is by gentle 
ridicule.  
 


## Dwarfs: Spiritual


There was once in London a club of small men, whose qualification for 
membership lay in their not exceeding five feet in height; these dwarfs held, 
or 
pretended to hold, the opinion that they were nearer the perfection of manhood 
than others, for they argued that primeval men had been far more gigantic than 
the present race, and consequently that the way of progress was to grow less 
and less, and that the human race as it perfected itself would become as 
diminutive as themselves. Such a club of Christians might be established in 
most 
cities, and without any difficulty might attain to an enormously numerous 
membership; for the notion is common that our dwarfish Christianity is, after 
all, the standard, and many even imagine that nobler Christians are 
enthusiasts, fanatical and hot-blooded, while they themselves are cool because 
they are wise, and indifferent because they are intelligent.  


## Earnest of the Spirit: the Pledge of Heaven


In the early times when land was sold, the owner cut a turf from the greensward 
and cast it into the cap of the purchase as a token that it was his; or he tore 
off the branch of a tree and put it into the new owner's hand to show that he 
was entitled to all the products of the soil; and when the purchaser of a house 
received seizing or possession, the key of the door or a bundle of thatch 
plucked from the roof; signified that the building was yielded up to him. The 
God of all grace has given to his people all the perfections of heaven to be 
their heritage for ever, and the earnest of his Spirit is to them the blessed 
token that all things are theirs. The Spirit's work of comfort and 
sanctification is a part of heaven's covenant blessings, a turf from the soil 
of Canaan, a twig from the tree of life, the key to mansions in the skies. 
Possessing the earnest of the Spirit we have received seizing of heaven.  
 


## Edification: the Aim of Christian Speech


When Handel's oratorio of the 'Messiah' had won the admiration of many of the 
great, Lord Kinnoul took occasion to pay him some compliments on the noble 
entertainment which he had lately given the town. 'My lord,' said Handel, 'I 
should be sorry if I only entertained them; I wish to make them better.' It is 
to be feared that many speech- makers at public meetings could not say as much; 
and yet how dare any of us waste the time of our fellow immortals in mere 
amusing talk! If we have nothing to speak to edification, how much better to 
hold our tongue!  
 


## Election


Andrew Fuller remarks, in a letter to two relatives:: ' I used to think that 
the doctrine of election was a reason why we need not pray, and I fear there 
are many who split upon this rock, who think it is to no purpose to pray, as 
things will be as they will be. But I now see that the doctrine of election is 
the greatest encouragement instead of a discouragement to prayer. He that 
decreed that any one should be finally saved, decreed that it should be in the 
way of prayer; as much as he that has decreed what we shall possess of the 
things of this life, has decreed that it shall be in the way of industry; and 
as 
we never think of being idle in common business, because God has decreed what 
we 
shall possess of this world's good, so neither should we be slothful in the 
business of our souls, because our final state is decreed.'  
 


## Enquirers: Not to Be Discouraged


At the Synod of Moscow, held by King Goutran, A.D. 585, bishops were forbidden 
to keep dogs in their houses, or birds of prey, lest the poor should be bit by 
these animals instead of being fed. Should not all ministers be equally 
concerned to chase away all morose habits, angry tempers and repulsive manners, 
which might discourage the approach of enquiring souls who desire to know of us 
the way of salvation? Sunday-school teachers may also take the hint.  
 


## Eternal Things and Fleeting


Afar off one can hardly tell which is mountain and which is cloud. The clouds 
rise with peaks and summits, all apparently as solid, and certainly as 
glistening, as the snow-clad Alps, so that the clearest eye might readily be 
deceived. Yet the mountain is unsubstantial as the cloud, and the cloud is 
never permanent as the mountain. So do the things of time appear to be 
all-important, far-reaching and enduring, and eternal things are not always of 
equal weight to the soul with those nearer at hand. Yet, despite all our 
instinctive judgments may suggest to the contrary, nothing earthly can ever be 
lasting, nothing in time can be worth considering compared with eternity. The 
cloudy philosophies of men may assume the shape of eternal truth, but the wind 
shall scatter them, while the great mountains of the divine word shall stand 
fast for ever and ever.  
 


## Evidence: Experimental


I have been informed that not long ago a certain infidel lecturer gave an 
opportunity to persons to reply to him after his oration, and he was of course 
expecting that one or two rashly zealous young men would rise to advance the 
common arguments for Christianity, which he was quite prepared, by hook or 
crook, to battle with or laugh down. Instead of reasoners, an old lady, 
carrying a basket, wearing an ancient bonnet, and altogether dressed in an 
antique fashion, which marked both her age and her poverty, came upon the 
platform. Putting down her basket and umbrella, she began and said, 'I paid 
threepence to hear of something better than Jesus Christ, and I have not heard 
it. Now, let me tell you what religion has done for me, and then tell me 
something better, or else you've cheated me out of the threepence which I paid 
to come in. Now,' she said, 'I have been a widow thirty years, and I was left 
with ten children, and I trusted in the Lord Jesus Christ in the depth of 
poverty, and he appeared for me and comforted me, and helped me to bring up my 
children so that they have grown up and turned out respectable. None of you can 
tell what the troubles of a poor lone woman are, but the Lord has made his 
grace 
all-sufficient. I was often very sore pressed, but my prayers were heard by my 
Father in heaven, and I was always delivered. Now, you are going to tell me 
something better than that: better for a poor woman like me! I have been to the 
Lord sometimes when I've been very low indeed, and there's been scarcely 
anything for us to eat, and I've always found his providence has been good and 
kind to me. And when I lay very sick, I thought I was dying, and my heart was 
ready to break at leaving my poor fatherless boys and girls, and there was 
nothing kept me up but the thought of Jesus and his faithful love to my poor 
soul; and you tell me that it was all nonsense. Those who are young and foolish 
may believe you, but after what I have gone through I know there is a reality 
in 
religion and it is no fancy. Tell me something better than what God has done 
for 
me, or else, I tell you, you have cheated me out of my threepence. Tell me 
something better.' The lecturer was a good hand at an argument, but such a mode 
of controversy was novel, and therefore he gave up the contest, and merely 
said, 
'Really, the dear old woman was so happy in her delusion he should not like to 
undeceive her.' 'No,' she said, 'that won't do. Truth is truth, and your 
laughing can't alter it. Jesus Christ has been all this to me, and I could not 
sit down in the hail and hear you talk against him without speaking up for him, 
and asking you whether you could tell me something better than what he has done 
for me. I've tried and proved him, and that's more than you have.'  
Herein is power, logic invincible, reasoning not to be gainsayed. The testing, 
and proving of God; getting his love really shed abroad in the heart, this is 
the great internal evidence of the gospel.  
 


## Evils (Little): Making Way for Greater


The carpenter's gimblet makes but a small hole, but it enables him to drive a 
great nail. May we not here see a representation of those minor departures from 
the truth which prepare the minds of men for grievous errors, and of those 
thoughts of sin which open a way for the worst of crimes! Beware, then, of 
Satan's gimblet.  
 


## Exaggeration


In certain ancient Italian frescoes Mary Magdalene is drawn as a woman 
completely enveloped in her own hair, which reaches to her feet and entirely 
wraps up her body as in a seamless garment. These queer draughtsmen must needs 
exaggerate; granted that the woman had long hair, they must enfold her in it 
like a silkworm in its own silk. The practice survives among the tribe of 
talkers, everything with them is on the enlarged scale; a man with ordinary 
abilities is a prodigy, another with very pardonable faults is a monster, a 
third with a few failings is a disgrace to humanity. Truth is as comely and 
beautiful as a woman with flowing hair, but exaggeration is as grotesque and 
ugly as the Magdalene, all hair from head to foot.  
 


## Excuses


Bishop W: , we are told, was one day rebuking one of his clergy for foxhunting. 
'My lord,' was the clergyman's answer, 'every man must have some relaxation. I 
assure you I never go to balls.' 'Oh,' said the bishop, 'I perceive you allude 
to my having been to the Duchess of S: 's party, but I give you my word that I 
was never in the same room with the dancers!' 'My lord,' responded the clergy 
man, 'my horse and I are getting old, and we are never in the same field with 
the hounds.' Thus each had satisfied his conscience, because of some point 
beyond which he had not gone. What he had done was to be overlooked on account 
of what he had not done. The habit of making precisely similar excuses is all 
but universal; though we see the absurdity of it in others we continue to 
practise it ourselves.  
 


## Experience


A Christian's experience is like a rainbow, made up of drops of the grief of 
earth, and beams of the bliss of heaven.  
 


## Experience: Boasting of Its Depth


In my house there is a well of extraordinary depth which reminds me of 
something better than the boasted deep experience of certain censorious 
professors, who teach that to feel sin within is the main thing, but to be 
delivered from it of small consequence. When this well was commenced, the owner 
of the place resolved to have water, cost what it might. The well-sinkers dug 
through mud, and clay, and stone, but found no water; here was the deep 
experience of the corruptionist, all earth and no living spring, the filth 
revealed but not removed, the leper discovered but not healed. Another hundred 
feet of hard digging deep in the dark, but no water: still deeper experience. 
Then a third hundred feet, and still dirt, but no crystal: the very finest 
grade 
of your deeply experimental professor, who ridicules the joys of faith, as 
being 
of the flesh and presumptuous. Still on, on, on went the workers, till one day 
leaving their tools to go to dinner, upon their return they found that the 
water 
was rising fast, and their tools were drowned. Be this last my experience: to 
go 
so deep as to reach the springs of everlasting love, and find all my poor 
doings and efforts totally submerged, because the blessed fountains of grace 
have broken in upon me, covering all the mire, and rock, and earth of my poor, 
naturally evil heart.  
 


## Experience: Necessary to a Minister


Buchsel says:: 'Orthodoxy can be learnt from others; living faith must be a 
matter of personal experience. The Lord sent out his disciples, saying, 'Ye 
shall testify of me, because ye have been with me from the beginning.' He only 
is a witness who speaks of what he has seen with his own eyes, heard with his 
own ears, and handled with his own hands. Orthodoxy is merely another form of 
rationalism, if it be learnt from without.'  
 


## Experience: Teaching the Value of Grace


In the olden time when the government of England had resolved to build a wooden 
bridge over the Thames at Westminster, after they had driven a hundred and 
forty piles into the river, there occurred one of the most severe frosts in the 
memory of man, by means of which the piles were torn away from their strong 
fastenings, and many of them snapped in two. The apparent evil in this case was 
a great good; it led the commissioners to reconsider their purpose, and a 
substantial bridge of stone was erected.  
How well it is when the fleshly reformations of unregenerate men are broken to 
pieces, if thus they are led to fly to the Lord Jesus, and in the strength of 
his Spirit are brought to build solidly for eternity. Lord, if thou sufferest 
my resolves and hopes to be carried away by temptations and the force of my 
corruptions, grant that this blessed calamity may drive me to depend wholly on 
thy grace, which cannot fail me.  
 


## Experience: Variety of


Ruskin, that most accurate observer, says:: 'Break off an elm-bough three feet 
long, in full leaf; and lay it on the table before you, and try to draw it, 
leaf for leaf. It is ten to one if in the whole bough (provided you do not 
twist 
it about as you work) you find one form of a leaf exactly like another; perhaps 
you will not even have one complete. Every leaf will be oblique, or 
foreshortened, or curled, or crossed by another, or shaded by another, or have 
something or other the matter with it; and though the whole bough will look 
graceful and symmetrical, you will scarcely be able to tell how or why it does 
so, since there is not one line of it like another.'  
If such infinite variety prevails in creation, we may reasonably expect to find 
the same in the experience of the saints. Uniformity is no rule of spiritual 
life. Let us not judge others because their feelings have not been precisely 
similar to ours. All the saints are led in a right way, but no two of them 
precisely in the same way. Far be it from us to set up a standard and expect 
all to be conformed to i if we reject all believers who labour under 
infirmities, or are marred with faults, our fellowship will be scant indeed.  


## Faith


The stupendous Falls of Niagara have been spoken of in every part of the world; 
but while they are marvelous to hear of and wonderful as a spectacle, they have 
been very destructive to human life, when by accident any have been carried 
down the cataract. Some years ago, two men, a bargeman and a collier, were in a 
boat and found themselves unable to manage it, it being carried so swiftly down 
the current that they must both inevitably be born down and dashed to pieces. 
At last, however, one man was saved by floating a rope to him, which he 
grasped. The same instant that the rope came into his hand, a log floated by 
the 
other man. The thoughtless and confused bargeman, instead of seizing the rope, 
laid hold on the log. It was a fatal mistake, they were both in imminent peril, 
but the one was drawn to shore because he had a connection with the people on 
the land, whilst the other, clinging to the loose, floating log, was borne 
irresistibly along, and never heard of afterwards. Faith has a saving 
connection with Christ. Christ is on the shore, so to speak, holding the rope, 
and as we lay hold of it with the hand of our confidence, he pulls us to shore; 
but our good works having no connection with Christ are drifted along down to 
the gulf of fell despair. Grapple our virtues as tightly as we may, even with 
hooks of steel, they cannot avail us in the least degree; they are the 
disconnected log which has no holdfast on the heavenly shore.  
 


## Faith (2)

 
The Emperor Napoleon I. was reviewing some troops upon the Place du Carrousel, 
in Paris; and, in giving an order, he thoughtlessly dropped the bridle upon his 
horse's neck, which instantly set off on a gallop. The emperor was obliged to 
cling to the saddle. At this moment a common soldier of the line sprang before 
the horse, seized the bridle, and handed it respectfully to the emperor. 'Much 
obliged to you, captain,' said the chief by this one word making the soldier a 
captain. The man believed the emperor, and, saluting him, asked, 'Of what 
regiment, sire?' Napoleon, charmed with his faith, replied, 'Of my guards!' and 
galloped off.  
Now, what will the soldier do? If he imitates those who before believing wish 
to see and feel, and like the apostle Thomas wait for palpable proof before 
relying upon testimony, he will say, 'a captain of the guard always wears a 
captain's uniform, and mine is only that of a common soldier. I cannot, 
therefore, believe myself a captain;' and the soldier would return to the 
ranks. 
But if, on the contrary, he believes fully and implicitly the emperor's word, 
and that his rank as captain of the guard depends not upon the uniform he 
wears, 
but that the uniform must be the consequence and evidence of his rank (and this 
will be his thought if he honours the emperor), he will not hesitate because of 
his dress, nor will he return to the line. And such, indeed, was the conduct of 
the man. As soon as the emperor left, the soldier laid down his gun, saying, 
'He 
may take it who will,' and instead of returning to his comrades, he approached 
the group of staff officers. On seeing him, one of the generals scornfully 
said, 
'What does this fellow want here?' 'This fellow,' replied the soldier proudly, 
'is a captain of the guard.' 'You? my poor friend! You are mad to say so!' 'He 
said it,' replied the soldier, pointing to the emperor, who was still in sight. 
'I ask your pardon, sir,' said the general respectfully, 'I was not aware of 
it.' 
Here, then, was exhibited a manifold faith. Since first the soldier believed 
the emperor, upon his word, because he heard him (as the Samaritans said of the 
Saviour), and afterwards, on the soldier's word, the general believed the 
emperor.  
You now see how a person may be sure that God gives peace: it is by believing 
his testimony, just as this soldier believed that of his emperor. That is to 
say, as he believed himself to be a captain before wearing his uniform; so on 
the word and promise of God, one believes himself to be a child of Jesus, 
before being sanctified by his Spirit.'Caesar Malan, D.D.  
 


## Faith: a Death Grip


A sea captain related at a prayer-meeting in Boston a short time ago a 
thrilling incident in his own experience.  'A few years ago,' said he, 'I was 
sailing by the island Cuba, when the cry ran through the ship, 'Man overboard!' 
It was impossible to put up the helm of the ship, but I instantly seized a rope 
and threw it over the ship's stern crying out to the man to seize it as for his 
life. The sailor caught the rope just as the ship was passing. I immediately 
took another rope, and making a slip noose of it, attached i to the other, and 
slid it down to the struggling sailor, an directed him to pass it over his 
shoulders and under his arms and he would be drawn on board. He was rescued; 
but h had grasped that rope with such firmness, with such a death grip, that it 
took hours before his hold relaxed, and his hand could be separated from it. 
With such eagerness, indeed, had he clutched the object that was to save him, 
that the strands of the rope became imbedded in the flesh of his hands!' 
Reader, has not God let down from heaven a rope to every sinner on the earth, 
is not every strand a precious promise, and ought we not to lay hold on it as 
for our very life?: The Family Treasury for 1859.  
 


## Faith: and Works


'Twas an unhappy division that has been made between faith and works. Though in 
my intellect I may divide them, just as in the candle I know there is both 
light and heat, but yet put out the candle, and they are both gone; one remains 
not without the other: so it is betwixt faith and works. Nay, in a right 
conception, fides est opus: if I believe a thing because I am commanded, that 
is 
opus.The Table Talk of John Selden.  
 


## Faith: Appropriating


I once heard a father tell, that when he removed his family to a new residence, 
where the accommodation was much more ample, and the substance much more rich 
and varied than that to which they had previously been accustomed, his youngest 
son, yet a lisping infant, ran round every room, and scanned every article with 
ecstasy, calling out, in childish wonder at every new sight, 'Is this ours, 
father? and is this ours?' The child did not say 'yours,' and I observed that 
the father while he told the story was not offended with the freedom. You could 
read in his glistening eye that the infant's confidence in appropriating as his 
own all that his father had, was an important element in his satisfaction.  
Such, I suppose, will be the surprise, and joy, and appropriating confidence, 
with which the child of our Father's family will count all his own, when he is 
removed from the comparatively mean condition of things present, and enters the 
infinite of things to come. When the glories of heaven burst upon his view, he 
does not stand at a distance, like a stranger, saying, 'O God, these are 
thine.' He bounds forward to touch and taste every provision which those 
blessed mansions contain, exclaiming, as he looks in the Father's face, 
'Father, 
this and this is ours.' The dear child is glad of all the Father's riches, and 
the Father is gladder of his dear child.W. Arnot.  
 


## Faith: GodìS Regard for It


A swallow having built its nest upon the tent of Charles V., the emperor 
generously commanded that the tent should not be taken down when the camp 
removed, but should remain until the young birds were ready to fly. Was there 
such gentleness in the heart of a soldier towards a poor bird which was not of 
his making, and shall the Lord deal hardly with his creatures when they venture 
to put their trust in him! Be assured he hath a great love to those trembling 
souls that fly for shelter to his royal courts. He that buildeth his nest upon 
a divine promise shall find it abide and remain until he shall fly away to the 
land where promises are lost in fulfilments.  


## Faith: GodìS Trial of


At the battle of Crescy, where Edward the Black Prince, then a youth of 
eighteen years of age, led the van, the king, his father, drew up a strong 
party 
on a rising ground, and there beheld the conflict in readiness to send relief 
where ft should be wanted. The young prince being sharply charged, and in some 
danger, sent to his father for succor; and as the king delayed to send it, 
another messenger was sent to crave immediate assistance. To him the king 
replied, 'Go, tell my son that I am not so inexperienced a commander as not to 
know when succor is wanted, nor so careless a father as not to send it.' He 
intended the honor of the day should be his son's, and therefore let him with 
courage stand to it, assured that help should be had when it might conduce most 
to his renown. God draws forth his servants to fight in the spiritual warfare, 
where they are engaged, not only against the strongholds of carnal reason, and 
the exalted imaginations of their own hearts, but also in the pitched field 
against Satan and his wicked instruments. But they, poor hearts, when the 
charge 
is sharp, are ready to despond, and cry with Peter, 'Save, Lord, we perish;' 
but 
God is too watchful to overlook their exigencies, and too much a Father to 
neglect their succour. If help, however, be delayed, it is that the victory may 
be more glorious by the difficulty of overcoming.  
 


## Faith: Overcoming Temptation


When a traveller was asked whether he did not admire the admirable structure of 
some stately building, 'No,' said he, 'for I've been at Rome, where better are 
to be seen every day.' O believer, if the world tempt thee with its rare sights 
and curious prospects, thou mayst well scorn them, having been, by 
contemplation, in heaven, and being able, by faith, to see infinitely better 
delights every hour of the day. 'This is the victory which overcometh the 
world, even our faith.'  


## Faith: Stimulating Endeavour


Se the spider casting out her film to the gale, she feel persuaded that 
somewhere or other it will adhere and for the commencement of her web. She 
commits the slender filament to the breeze believing that there is a place 
provide' for it to fix itself. In this fashion should we believingly cast fort 
our endeavors in this life, confident that God will find a place for us. He who 
bids us pray and work will aid our efforts an guide us in his Providence in a 
right way. Sit not still i despair, O son of toil, but again cast out the 
floating thread of hopeful endeavor, and the wind of love will bear it t its 
resting place.  
 


## Faith: the Summary of Virtue


The Jews in the Talmud have the saying, 'The whole law was given to Moses at 
Sinai, in six hundred and thirteen precepts.' David, in the fifteenth Psalm, 
brings them all within the compass of eleven. Isaiah brings them to six, Isaiah 
33:4; Micah to three, Micah 6:8; Isaiah, again, to two, Isaiah 46; Habakkuk to 
this one, 'The just shall live by faith.' Habakkuk 2:4.Lightfoot.  
 


## Faith: Triumph of


During an earthquake that occurred a few years since, the inhabitants of a 
small village were generally very much alarmed, but they were at the same time 
surprised at the calmness and apparent joy of an old lady whom they all knew. 
At length one of them, addressing the old lady, said: 'Mother, are you not 
afraid?' 'No,' said the mother in Israel; 'I rejoice to know that I have a God 
1hai can shake the world.'  
 


## False Confidences


Some years ago, there was a bridge at Bath in so crazy a condition, that 
cautious persons chose rather to make a long circuit than run the risk of 
crossing it. One day, however, a very nervous lady, hurrying home to dress for 
the evening, came suddenly upon the spot without, till that moment, remembering 
the danger. The sight of the bridge reminded her of its ruinous state, just as 
she was about to set her foot upon it. But what was she to do? If she went on, 
the frail arch might give way under her; to go round would be fatiguing and 
attended with much loss of time. She stood for some minutes trembling in 
anxious hesitation; but at last a lucky thought occurred to her, she called for 
a sedan-chair, and was carried over in that conveyance! You may laugh, perhaps, 
at this good lady's odd expedient for escaping danger by shutting out the view 
of it. But is not something of the same kind happening around you every day? 
Those people who are alarmed and perplexed at the danger of having to judge for 
themselves in religious matters, think to escape that danger by choosing to 
take some guide as an infallible one, and believe or disbelieve as he bids 
them. 
What is this but crossing the crazy bridge in a sedan-chair? In determining to 
believe whatever their guide affirms, they are in reality choosing to make 
every single exercise of faith which follows that original determination; and 
they are choosing to believe he is infallible into the bargain There are at 
least as many chances of error as before against every single article of faith 
in the creed which they adopt upon their guide's authority; and there are also 
additional chances against that authority itself. Thus, in order to get over 
more safely, they put not only their own weight, but that of the sedan-chair 
also, upon the tottering arch.: Excelsior.  
 


## False Ropes: Danger of


A sailor while clinging with others to a waterlogged vessel, observed great 
swarms of sharks and other ferocious fish swimming on all sides, as if waiting 
for their prey. If men had eyes might they not clearly see evil spirits 
gathering around the sinking hulks of Romanism and self-righteousness, watching 
for their expected victims?  
 


## Fear of Sin


The old naturalist, Ulysses Androvaldus, tells us that a dove is so afraid of a 
hawk, that she will be frightened at the sight of one of its feathers. Whether 
it be so or not, I cannot tell; but this I know, that when a man has had a 
thorough shaking over the jaws of hell, he will be so afraid of sin, that even 
one of its feathers: any one sin: will alarm and send a thrill of fear through 
his soul. This is a part of the way by which the Lord turns us when we are 
turned indeed.  
 


## Fog: a Figure of Our Partial Knowledge


Being once surrounded by a dense mist on the Styhead Pass in the Lake District, 
we felt ourselves to be transported into a world of mystery where everything 
was swollen to a size and appearance more vast, more terrible, than is usual on 
this sober planet. A little mountain tarn, scarcely larger than a farmer's 
horse-pond, expanded into a great lake whose distant shores were leagues beyond 
the reach of our poor optics; and as we descended into the valley of Wastwater, 
the rocks on one side like the battlements of heaven, and the descent on the 
other hand, looked like the dreadful lips of a yawning abyss; and yet when one 
looked back again in the morning's clear light there was nothing very dangerous 
in the pathway, or terrible in the rocks. The road was a safe though sharp 
descent, devoid of terrors to ordinary mountain climbers. In the distance 
through the fog the shepherd 'stalks gigantic,' and his sheep are full-grown 
lions.  
Into such blunders do we fall in our life-pilgrimage; a little trouble in the 
distance is, through our mistiness, magnified into a crushing adversity. We see 
a lion in the way, although it is written that no ravenous beast shall go up 
thereon. A puny foe is swollen into a Goliath, and the river of death widens 
into a shoreless sea.  
Come, heavenly wind, and blow the mist away, and then the foe will be despised, 
and the bright shores on the other side the river will stand out clear in the 
light of faith!  
 


## Forebodings: Falsified


John Condor, afterwards D.D., was born at Wimple in Cambridgeshire, June 3, 
1714. His grandfather, Richard Condor, kissed him, and, with tears in his eyes, 
said, 'Who knows what sad days these little eyes are likely to see?' things 
wearing at that time a threatening aspect, relative to Dissenters. Dr. Condor 
remarked upon mentioning the above circumstance, 'These eyes have, for more 
than sixty years, seen nothing but goodness and mercy follow me and the 
churches 
of Christ, even to this day.'  
Thus many a desponding prophecy is falsified by events most blessed. We write 
bitter things, and God blots them out and writes gracious things in lieu 
thereof. Many a gloomy vaticinator might save himself his depression of spirit 
if he would remember that 'the Lord reigneth,' and 'he will speak peace unto 
his people.'  
 


## Formalism: Tricks of


In Mrs. Grant's 'Letters from the Mountains' (1806), is the following anecdote 
of the then Duchess of Gordon. 'The duchess said that on Sunday she never saw 
company, nor played cards, nor went out: in England, indeed, she did so, 
because every one else did the same, but she would not introduce those manners 
into this country (Scotland). I stared at these gradations of piety growing 
warmer as it came northward, but was wise enough to stare silently.'  
The tricks of formalism and hypocrisy are evermore the same. Man is regarded 
more than God. What Mrs. Grundy may say has far more influence with many than 
what the Lord may say. This is miserable meanness and rank impiety.  
 


## Formality: Habits of Worthless


That honored servant of Christ, Richard Knill, notes in his journal the 
following amusing incident of the force of habit, as exemplified in his horse. 
'Mr. and Mrs. Loveless would have me live with them, but they charged me very 
little for my board, whereby I was enabled, with my salary, to support seven 
native schools. These were so situated that I could visit them all in one day. 
My horse and gig were seen constantly on the rounds; and my horse at last knew 
where to stop as well as I did. This nearly cost a Bengal officer his life. 
Captain Page, a godly man, who was staying with us until a ship was ready to 
take him to the Cape, one morning requested me to lend him my horse and gig to 
take him to the city. The captain was driving officer-like, when the horse 
stopped suddenly, and nearly threw him out. He inquired, 'What place is this?' 
The answer was, 'It's the Sailors' Hospital.' They started again, and soon the 
horse stopped suddenly, and the captain was nearly out as before. 'What's 
this?': ' A school, sir,' was the reply. At last he finished his business, and 
resolved to return another way. By doing this he came near my schools, and 
again and again the horse stopped. When he got home, he said, 'I am glad that I 
have returned without broken bones, but never will I drive a religious horse 
again.'  Persons who go to places of worship from mere habit and without 
entering into the devotions of the service, may here see that their religion is 
only such as a horse may possess, and a horse's religion will never save a man. 
 


## Friendship of the World: Vanity


The vanity of all friendship which is not founded in true principle, was never 
more plainly expressed than in an honest, but heartless, sentence of one of 
Horace Walpole's letters. 'If one of my friends happens to die, I drive down to 
St. James's Coffee-house, and bring home a new one.' The name of 'friend' is 
desecrated in a worldling's mouth: but there is a friend.  
 


## Frivolities: Render Men Callous to the Gospel


'When Bonaparte put the Duke d'Enghien to death, all Paris felt so much horror 
at the event that the throne of the tyrant trembled under him. A 
counterrevolution was exp ted, and would most probably have taken place, had 
not Bonaparte ordered a new ballet to be brought out, with the utmost splendor, 
at the Opera. The subject he pitched on was 'Ossian, or the Bards.' It is still 
recollected in Paris, as perhaps the grandest spectacle that had ever been 
exhibited there. 'he consequence was that the murder of the Duke d'Enghien was 
totally forgotten, and nothing but the new ballet was talked of.'  
After this fashion Satan takes off men's thoughts from their sins, and drowns 
the din of their consciences. Lest they should rise in revolt against him, he 
gives them the lusts of the flesh, the vanities of pride, the cares of this 
world, or the merriment of fools, to lead away their thoughts. Poor silly men 
are ready enough for these misleading gaieties, and for the sake of them the 
solemnities of death and eternity are forgotten.  


## Frivolity of Mind


If over that little heap of dust you hold a good magnet, should there be 
present a nail, or a needle, or a few iron filings, they will at once spring up 
and cling to the attracting bar. And were there only a magnet strong enough, it 
might soon become the monopolist of that metal, which, after all, is more 
precious than silver or gold.  
If now, on your coat-sleeve, or on the woolen table-cover you rub a stick of 
wax or amber, you impart to this substance also an attractive power. But it is 
a magnet of a very different sort. Hold it ever so near that knife or needle, 
and there is no movement. Hold it near the carpet, or, better still, insinuate 
it into some unswept corner, and every loose particle, the thread-clippings and 
paper-shavings, the stray feathers, and silky fibers, will instantly leap up to 
it, and convert its bald apex into a little mass of rubbish.  
Some minds have a powerful affinity for what is sterling and useful. Themselves 
strong like the loadstone, they are constantly acquiring facts, and principles, 
and maxims of wisdom. They gain the respect of others. They become 
master-spirits, moving and controlling their fellows. If in business, they turn 
out successful merchants; if students, they step forth the chiefs of their 
profession; if thrown into public life, they graduate into the highest ranks of 
statesmanship, and become the moulders of an age, the disposers of an empire, 
the movers of mankind.  
But some minds have an attraction quite as intense for what is frivolous. In 
early life they do not 'take to' tasks and lessons; and all throughout they 
retain the intellectual languor, which deprecates instruction and refuses to 
apply. Their theory of life is perpetual recreation, and ignoring the 
commandment which says, 'Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work,' they 
never know the sweetness of a true Sabbatic repose. Unused to self-denial, and 
seldom roused to exertion, if they enter business you soon hear that they have 
'stopped;' and in a learned profession, if they do not 'stop,' it is only 
because they never could get on.: Excelsior.  
 


## Generous Feeling: towards Brethren


'One incident gives high proof of the native generosity of Turner's nature. He 
was one of the hanging committee, as the phrase goes, of the Royal Academy. The 
walls were full when Turner's attention was attracted by a picture sent in by 
an unknown provincial artist by the name of Bird. 'A good picture,' he 
exclaimed. 'It must be hung up and exhibited.'  'Impossible!' responded the 
committee of academicians. 'The arrangement cannot be disturbed. Quite 
impossible!' 'A good picture,' iterated Turner, 'it must be hung up;' and, 
finding his colleagues to be as obstinate as himself, he hitched down one of 
his 
own pictures, and hung up Bird's in its place.' Would to God that in far more 
instances the like spirit ruled among servants of the Lord Jesus. The desire to 
honour others and to give others a fair opportunity to rise should lead 
ministers of distinction to give place to less eminent men to whom it may be of 
essential service to become better known. We are not to look every man on his 
own things, but every man also on the things of others. 
 


## Giving


A woman who was known to be very poor, came to a missionary meeting in 
Wakefield, and offered to subscribe a penny a-week to the mission fund, 
'Surely,' said one, 'you are too poor to afford this?' She replied, 'I spin so 
many hanks of yarn a-week for my living, and I'll spin one hank more, and that 
will be a penny a-week for the society.'  
 


## God: Acting as a Father


A king is sitting with his council deliberating on high affairs of state 
involving the destiny of nations, when suddenly he hears the sorrowful cry of 
his little child who has fallen down, or been frightened by a wasp; he rises 
and runs to his relief, assuages his sorrows and relieves his fears. Is there 
anything unkingly here? Is it not most natural? Does it not even elevate the 
monarch in your esteem? Why then do we think it dishonorable to the King of 
kings, our heavenly Father, to consider the small matters of his children? It 
is infinitely condescending, but is it not also superlatively natural that 
being 
a Father he should act as such?  
 


## God: His Benevolence in Creation


The benevolence of our great Creator is chanted even by things unpleasant to 
the ear. 'The nuptial song of reptiles,' says Kirby, 'is not, like that of 
birds, the delight of every heart; but it is rather calculated to disturb and 
horrify than to still the soul. The hiss of serpents, the croaking of frogs and 
toads, the moaning of turtles, the bellowing of crocodiles and alligators, form 
their gamut of discords.' Here, also, we may read beneficent design. Birds are 
the companions of man in the lawn and forest, in his solitary walks, amidst his 
rural labours, and around the home of his domestic enjoyments. They are, 
therefore, framed beautiful to the eye, and pleasing to the ear; but of the 
reptile tribes, some are his formidable enemies, and none were ever intended to 
be his associates. They shun cultivation, and inhabit unfrequented marshes or 
gloomy wilds. Their harsh notes and ungainly or disgusting forms, serve 
therefore to warn him of danger, or to turn his steps to places more fit for 
his habitation: H. Duncan's Sacred Philosophy of the Seasons.  
 


## God: Is Light


Suppose the case of a cripple who had spent his life in a room where the sun 
was never seen. He has heard of its existence, he believes in it, and indeed, 
has seen enough of its light to give him high ideas of its glory. Wishing to 
see 
the sun, he is taken out at night into the streets of an illuminated city. At 
first he is delighted, dazzled; but after he has had time to reflect, he finds 
darkness spread amid the lights, and he asks, 'Is this the sun?' He is taken 
out under the tarry sky, and is enraptured; but, on reflection, finds that 
night covers the earth, and again asks, 'Is this the sun?' He is carried out 
some bright day at noontide, and no sooner does his eye open on the sky than 
all question is at an end. There is but one sun. His eye is content: it has 
seen 
its highest object, and feels that there is nothing brighter.  
So with the soul: it enjoys all lights, yet amid those of art and nature, is 
still enquiring for something greater. But when it is led by the reconciling 
Christ into the presence of the Father, and he lifts up upon it the light of 
his countenance, all thought of anything greater disappears. As there is but 
one sun, so there is but one God. The soul which once discerns and knows him, 
feels that greater or brighter there is none, and that the only possibility of 
ever beholding more glory is by drawing nearer.: Rev. W. Arthur.  
 


## God: Love of


All things that are on earth shall wholly pass away, 
Except the love of God, which shall live and last for aye. 
The forms of men shall be as they had never been; 
The blasted groves shall lose their fresh and tender green; 
The birds of the thicket shall end their pleasant song, 
And the nightingale shall cease to chant the evening long; 
The kine of the pasture shall feel the dart that kills, 
And all the fair white flocks shall perish from the hills; 
The goat and antlered stag, the wolf and the fox, 
The wild boar of the wood, and the chamois of the rocks, 
And the strong and fearless bear, in the trodden dust shall lie; 
And the dolphin of the sça, and the mighty whale shall die, 
And realms shall be dissolved, and empires be no more; 
And they shall bow to death, who ruled from shore to shore;  And the great 
globe itself (so the holy writings tell), 
With the rolling firmament, where the starry armies dwell, 
Shall melt with fervent heat: they shall all pass away, 
Except the love of God, which shall live and last for aye.  
William Cullen Byarn  
 


## God: Vague Conceptions of


'One day, in conversation with the Jungo-kritu, head pundit of the College of 
Fort William, on the subject of God this man, who is truly learned in his own 
shastrus, gave me from one of their books, this parable;: 'In a certain country 
there existed a village of blind men. These men had heard that there was an 
amazing animal called the elephant, but they knew not how to form an idea of 
his shape. One day an elephant happened to pass through the place: the 
villagers crowded to the spot where this animal was standing. One of them got 
hold of his trunk, another seized his ear, another his tail, another one of his 
legs, etc. After thus trying to gratify their curiosity they returned into the 
village, and sitting down together they began to give their ideas on what the 
elephant was like: the man who had seized his trunk said he thought the 
elephant 
was like the body of the plantain tree; the man who had felt his ear said he 
thought he was like the fan with which the Hindoos clean the rice; the man who 
had felt his tail said he thought he must be like a snake, and the man who had 
seized his leg, thought he must be like a pillar. An old blind man of some 
judgment was present, who was greatly perplexed how to reconcile these jarring 
notions, respecting the form of the elephant; but he at length said, 'You have 
all been to examine this animal, it is true, and what you report cannot be 
false: I suppose, therefore, that that which was like the plaintain tree must 
be 
his trunk; that which was like a fan must be his ear; that which was like a 
snake must be his tail, and that which was like a pillar must be his body.' In 
this way, the old man united all their notions, and made out something of the 
form of the elephant. Respecting God,' added the pundit, 'we are all blind; 
none 
of us has seen him; those who wrote the astrus, like the old blind man, have 
collected all the reasonings and conjectures of mankind together, and have 
devoured to form some idea of the nature of the Divine being.'  
The pundit's parable may be appropriately applied to the essence of theology. 
Some Christians see one truth and some another, and each one is quite sure that 
he has beheld the whole. Where is the master-mind who shall gather up the pith 
out of each creed, and see the theology of the Bible in completeness?: a 
sublimer sight than the believers in the world have yet been able to imagine.  
 


## Godliness: No Burden to True Saints


The Princess Elizabeth carried the crown for her sister in the procession at 
Mary's coronation, and• complained to Noailles of its great weight. 'Be 
patient,' was the adroit answer, 'it will seem lighter when on your own head.' 
The outward forms of godliness are as burdensome to an unregenerate man as was 
the crown to the princess; but let him be born again and so made a possessor of 
the good things of divine grace, and they will sit easily enough upon his head, 
as his glory and delight.  
 


## Gold: Places of Its Abundance Undesirable


Did the eye ever rest upon a more utter desolation than that which surrounds 
the gold mines near Goldau in the Hartz mountains? It is worse than a howling 
wilderness, it is a desert with its bowels torn out, and scattered in horrid 
confusion. More or less this is true of all gold mining regions, and Humboldt, 
when writing of the Pearl Coast, says that it presents the same aspect of 
misery as the countries of gold and diamonds. Is it so then? Are riches so near 
akin to horror? Lord, let me set my affections on better things, and seek for 
less dangerous wealth. 
 


## Gospel (Simple): the Need of the Wisest


During an illness, that illustrious scholar Bengel sent for a student in the 
Theological Institution, and requested him to impart a word of consolation. The 
youth replied, 'Sir, I am but a pupil, a mere learner; I don't know what to say 
to a teacher like you.' 'What!' said Bengel, 'a divinity student, and not able 
to communicate a word of scriptural comfort!' The student, abashed, contrived 
to utter the text, 'The blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, cleanseth us 
from all sin.' 'That is the very word I want,' said Bengel, 'it is quite 
enough,' and taking him affectionately by the hand dismissed him.  
 


## Gospel: Duty of Spreading It


Huber, the great naturalist, tells us, that if a single wasp discovers a 
deposit of honey or other food, he will return his nest, and impart the good 
news to his companions, will will sally forth in great numbers to partake of 
the 
fare which has been discovered for them. Shall we who have found honey in the 
rock Christ Jesus, be less considerate of o; fellow men than wasps are of their 
fellow insects? Ought we not rather like the Samaritan woman to hasten to tell 
t 
good news? Common humanity should prevent one of them from concealing the great 
discovery which grace has enable us to make.  
 


## Gospel: Jesus the Sum of


IN a village church in one of the Tyrolese valleys, we saw upon the pulpit an 
outstretched arm, carved in wood, the hand of which held forth a cross. We 
noted the emblem as full of instruction as to what all true ministry should be, 
and must be: a holding forth of the cross of Christ to the multitude as the 
only trust of sinners. Jesus Christ must be set forth evidently crucified among 
them. Lord, make this the aim and habit of all our ministers.  
 


## Gospel: Needs No Meretricious Adornments


When Dionysius, the tyrant, sent Lysander some rich Sicilian garments for his 
daughters, he refused them, alleging that 'He was afraid these fine clothes 
would make them look more homely.' The truth of God is so comely in itself that 
the trappings of oratory are far more likely to lessen its glory than to 
increase it. Paul saith that he preached the gospel 'not with wisdom of words, 
lest the cross of Christ should be made of none effect.'  
 


## Gospel: Needs Spiritual Ears to Appreciate It


Alphonse Karr heard a gardener ask his master permission to sleep for the 
future in the stable; 'for,' said he, 'There is no possibility of sleeping in 
the chamber behind the henhouse, sir; there are nightingales there which do 
nothing but guggle, and keep up a noise all the night.' The sweetest sounds are 
but an annoyance to those who have no musical taste: doubtless the music of 
heaven would have no charms to men's minds, certainly the joyful sound of the 
gospel is unappreciated so long as men's ears remain uncircumcised.  
 


## Gospel: Nothing Else Will Satisfy


Take away a toy from a child, and give him another, and he is satisfied; but if 
he be hungry no toy will do, As neworn babes, true believers desire the sincere 
milk of the Word; and the desire of grace in this way is grace.: John Newton.  
 


## Gospel: Should Be Preached Constantly


When Le Tourneau preached the Lent sermon at St. Benoit, at Paris, Louis XIV. 
enquired of Boileau, 'if he knew anything of a preacher called Le Tourneau, 
whom everybody was running after?' 'Sire,' replied the poet, 'your Majesty 
knows 
that people always run after novelties; this man preaches the gospel.' 
Boileau's remark as to the novelty of preaching the gospel in his time, brings 
to mind the candid confession of a Flemish preacher, who, in a sermon delivered 
before an audience wholly of his own order, said, 'We are worse than Judas; he 
sold and delivered his Master, we sell him too, but deliver him not.'  
 


## Gospel: to Be Preached Simply


Of the works of a famous alchemist of the thirteenth century, it is said that, 
'whoever would react his book to find out the secret would employ all his labor 
in vain.' All the gold makers who have written upon their favorite mystery are 
in the like predicament, no one can comprehend w the secret is which they 
pretend to divulge. May we shrewdly guess that if they had any secret to tell 
they should put it in intelligible language, and that their pompous involved 
sentences are only a screen for their utter ignorant of the matter? When we 
hear preachers talking of div things in a style savoring more of metaphysical 
subtile than of gospel plainness; when the seeking sinner cam find out the way 
of salvation because of their philosophic jargon, may we not with justice 
suspect that the preach does not know the gospel, and conceals his culpable 
ignorant behind the veil of rhetorical magniloquence? Surely if a man 
understood 
a matter so important to all his hearers the way of salvation, he would feel 
constrained to tell it all in words which all might comprehend.  
 


## Grace


Payson, when dying, expressed himself with great earnestness respecting the 
grace of God as exercised in saving lost men, and seemed particularly affected 
that it should be bestowed on one so ill-deserving as himself. 'Oh, how 
sovereign! Oh, how sovereign! Grace is the only thing that make us like God. I 
might be dragged through heaven, earth, and hell, and I should be still the 
same sinful, polluted wretch, unless God himself should renew and cleanse me.'  
 


## Grace: Equal to Our Day


Whenever the Lord sends his servants to do extraordinary work he always gives 
them extraordinary strength; or if puts them to unusual suffering he gives them 
unusual patience. When we enter upon war with some petty New Zealand chief, our 
troops expect to have their charges defrayed, id accordingly we pay them gold 
by thousands, as their expenses may require; but when an army marches against a 
rim monarch, in an unknown country, who has insulted the British flag, we pay, 
as we know to our cost, not by thousands but by millions. And thus, if God 
calls 
us to common and ordinary trials, he will defray the charges of our warfare by 
thousands, but if he commands us to an unusual struggle with some tremendous 
foe, he will discharge the liabilities of our war by millions, according to the 
riches of his grace in which he has abounded towards us through Christ Jesus.  
 


## Grace: Maturity in


Maturity in grace makes us willing to part with worldly goods; the green apple 
needs a sharp twist to separate it from the bough; but the ripe fruit parts 
readily from the wood. Maturity in grace makes it easier to part with life 
itself; the unripe pear is scarcely beaten down with much labor, while its 
mellow companion drops readily into the hand with the slightest shake. Rest 
assured that love to the things of this life, and cleaving to this present 
state, are sure indications of immaturity in the divine life.  
 


## Grace: Triumphant over Trial


'In one place near the Hospice of St. Bernard, I met with a curious natural 
conservatory. The under surface of the snow having been melted by the warmth of 
the soil, which in Alpine regions is always markedly higher than that of the 
air, was not in contact with it. A snowy vault was thus formed, glazed on the 
top with thin plates of transparent ice; and here grew a most lovely cushion of 
the Aretia Helvetica, covered with hundreds of its delicate rosy flowers, like 
a miniature hydrangea blossom. The dark color of the soil favored the 
absorption of heat; and, prisoned in its crystal cave, this little fairy grew 
and blossomed securely from the very heart of winter, the unfavorable 
circumstances around all seeming so many ministers of good, increasing its 
strength, and enhancing its loveliness.'  
This delightful little sketch of nature by Mr. Hugh Macmillan may be paralleled 
in the kingdom of grace; for in the cold shade of poverty, protected from a 
thousand temptations by that very scant, and in the centre of sinful society, 
stimulated to a bolder confession by the surrounding opposition, we have met 
with the rarest specimens of grace. Where every influence appeared to be 
deadly, the most vigorous spiritual life has been produced.  
 


## Graces: Should Be Seasonable


It is said in praise of the tree planted by the rivers of water, that it 
bringeth forth its fruit in ifs season; good men should aim to have seasonable 
virtues. For instance, a giving spirit is golden if it display itself in the 
moment when an injury is received; it is but silver if it show itself in speedy 
reflection, and it is mere lead if it be manifested after a long time for 
cooling. The whole matter reminds us of Warwickshire estimate of swarms of 
bees.  
'A swarm of bees in May 
Is worth a load of hay; 
A swarm of bees in June 
Is worth a silver spune (spoon); 
A swarm of bees in July 
Is not worth a fly.'  
 


## Gratitude


There is a very touching little story told of a poor woman with two children, 
who had not a bed for them to lie upon, and scarcely any clothes to cover them. 
In the depth of winter they were nearly frozen, and the mother took the door of 
the cellar off the hinges, and set it up before the corner where they crouched 
down to sleep, that some of the draught and cold might be kept from them. One 
of the children whispered to her, when she complained of how badly off they 
were, 'Mother, what do those dear little children do who have no cellar door to 
put up in front of them?' Even there, you see, the little heart found cause for 
thankfulness.  
 


## Growth in Grace


We have the likenesses of our boys taken on every birthday, and twelve of the 
annual portraits are now framed in one picture, so that we see them at a glance 
from their babyhood to their youth. Suppose such photographic memorials of our 
own spiritual life had been taken and preserved, would there be a regular 
advance, as in these boys, or should we still have been exhibited in the 
perambulator? Have not some grown awhile, and then suddenly dwarfed? Have not 
others gone back to babyhood? Here is a wide field for reflection.  
 


## Growth in Grace (2)


Lettuces, radishes, and such like garden crops, are soon out of the ground and 
ready for the table, a month almost suffices to perfect them; but an oak 
requires long centuries to come to the fulness of its growth. Those graces 
which are most precious and durable will cost us longest to produce; those good 
things which spring up hastily may have some transient worth about them, but we 
cannot look for permanence and value in them. There is no need to deplore the 
slowness of our spiritual growth, if that which comes of it be of a solid 
character.  
 


## Growth in Grace (2)


The vendors of flowers in the streets of London, are wont to commend them to 
customers by crying, 'All a blowing and a growing.' It would be no small praise 
to Christians if we could say as much for them, but, alas! of too many 
professors the cry would truthfully be, 'All a stunting and a withering.'  
 


## Grumblers


A heavy waggon was being dragged along a country lane by a team of oxen. The 
axle-trees groaned and creaked terribly, when the oxen turning round, thus 
addressed the wheels:: 'Halloa, there! why do you make so much noise? we bear 
all the labor, and we, not you, ought to cry out!' Those complain first in our 
churches who have least to do. The gift of grumbling is largely dispensed among 
those who have no other talents, or who keep what they have wrapped up in a 
napkin.  
 


## Habits: Destructive Power of


The surgeon of a regiment in India relates the following incident:: 'A soldier 
rushed into the tent, to inform me that one of his comrades was drowning in a 
pond close by, and nobody could attempt to save him in consequence of the dense 
weeds which covered the surface. On repairing to the spot, we found the poor 
fellow in his last struggle, manfully attempting to extricate himself from the 
meshes of ropelike grass that encircled his body; but, to all appearance, the 
more he labored to escape, the more firmly they became coiled round his limbs. 
At last he sank, and the floating plants closed in, and left not a trace of the 
disaster. After some delay, a raft was made, and we put off to the spot, and 
sinking a pole some twelve feet, a native dived, holding on by the stake, and 
brought the body to the surface. I shall never forget the expression of the 
dead man's face: the clenched teeth, and fearful distortion of the countenance, 
while coils of long trailing weeds clung round his body and limbs, the muscles 
of which stood out stiff and rigid, whilst his hands grasped thick masses, 
showing how bravely he had struggled for life.'  
This heart-rending picture is a terribly accurate representation of a man with 
a conscience alarmed by remorse, struggling with his sinful habits, but finding 
them too strong for him. Divine grace can save the wretch from his unhappy 
condition, but if he be destitute of that, his remorseful agonies will but make 
him more hopelessly the slave of his passions. Laocoon, in vain endeavoring to 
tear off the serpents' coils from himself and children, aptly portrays the 
long-enslaved sinner contending with sin in his own strength. 'Can the 
Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots?'  
 


## Happiness of Believers


One of my hearers had seven children, who had come in rapid succession; he was 
hard-working and well spoken of. His children were all asleep when I went in, 
and as I expressed the pleasure the sight of their peaceful little faces gave 
me, the father said, 'Ay, these are fine times for them; they need not to take 
any thought for themselves.' On the Sunday the man was in church. I dwelt much 
upon the happy state of children, exempt from care as they were, and went on to 
say that believers were the children of God, that the Lord had commanded them 
to be careful for nothing, and promised that he would care for them. The man 
understood me, and it evidently pleased him to hear his expression repeated 
from the pulpit .: Büchsel.  
 


## Head: Christ


Everyone knows that it would be far better to lose our feet than our head. Adam 
had feet to stand with, but we have lost them by his disobedience; yet glory be 
to God, we have found a Head, in whom we abide eternally secure, a Head which 
we shall never lose.  
 


## Hearers


Jedidiah Buxton, the famous peasant, who could multiply nine figures by nine in 
his head, was once taken to see Garrick act. When he went back to his own 
village, he was asked what he thought of the great actor and his doings. 'Oh!' 
he said, 'he did not know, he had only seen a little man strut about the stage, 
and repeat 7,956 words.' Here was a want of the ability to appreciate what he 
saw, and the exercise of the reigning faculty to the exclusion of every other. 
Similarly our hearers, if destitute of the spiritual powers by which the gospel 
is discerned, fix their thoughts on our words, tones, gestures, or countenance, 
and make remarks upon us which from a spiritual point of view are utterly 
absurd. How futile are our endeavors without the Holy Spirit!  
 


## Hearing


'I have an ear for other preachers,' Sir John Cheke used to say, 'but I have a 
heart for Latimer.' Here is a very clear and main distinction. Too often men 
hear the Word sounding its drums and trumpets outside their walls, and they are 
filled with admiration of the martial music, but their city gates are fast 
closed and vigilantly guarded, so that the truth has no admittance, but only 
the sound of it. Would to God we knew how to reach men's affections, for the 
heart is the target we aim at, and unless we hit it we miss altogether.  


## Hearing: Carelessly


We crossed and recrossed the river several times by the ferry-boat at Basle. We 
had no object in the world but merely amusement and curiosity, to watch the 
simple machinery by which the same current is made to drift the boat in 
opposite directions from side to side. To other passengers it was a business, 
to 
us a sport. Our hearers use our ministry in much the same manner when they come 
to it out of the idlest curiosity, and listen to us as a means of spending a 
pleasant hour. That which should ferry them across to a better state of soul, 
they use as a mere pleasure-boat, to sail up and down in, making no progress 
after years of hearing. Alas! it may be sport to them, but it is death to us, 
because we know it will ere long be death to them.  
 


## Hearing: for Others


The negro preachers are often marked by great shrewdness and mother wit; and 
will not only point the truth, but barb it, so that if once in it will stick 
fast. One of these was once descanting with much earnestness on different ways 
in which men lose their souls. Under one head of remark, he said that men often 
lose their souls through excessive generosity. 'What!' he exclaimed, 'you tell 
me you never heard of that before? You say, ministers often tell us we lose our 
souls for our stinginess, and for being covetous: but who ever heard of a man 
that hurt himself by going too far t'other way? I tell you how they do it. They 
sit down under the sermon, and when the preacher touch upon this sin or that 
sin, they no-take it to themselves, but give this part of the sermon to one 
brother, and that part to another brother. And so they give away the whole 
sermon, and it do them no good. And that's the way they lose their souls by 
being too generous.'  
There is great truth in this remark. The want of a self-applying conscience 
causes much of the best of preaching to fall like rain upon a rock, from which 
it soon runs off; or if a little is caught in a hollow, it only stagnates, and 
then dries away, leaving no blessing behind. A sermon, however true and 
forcible, thus disposed of, does no good to those among whom it is so silently 
distributed, while it leaves him who squanders its treasures to perish at last 
in the poverty and emptiness of his soul.  
 


## Hearing: Useless Alone


What a mistake to imagine that, by hearing first one preacher and then another, 
we can derive benefit to our souls! More is wanted than such hearing. A raven 
may fly from cage to cage, but it is not thereby changed into a dove. Go from 
room to room of the royal feast, and the sight of the tables will never stay 
thy hunger. Reader, the main thing is to have and hold the truth personally and 
inwardly; if this be not seen to, thou wilt die in thy sins, though ten 
thousand voices should direct thee to the way of salvation. Pity indeed is it 
that the bulk of hearers are hearers only, and are no more likely to go to 
heaven than the seats they sit on in the assembly of the saints.  
 


## Heart (Broken): Its Prevalence with God


What man among you can stand against his children's tears? When King Henry II., 
in the ages gone by, was provoked to take up arms against his ungrateful and 
rebellious son, he besieged him in one of the French towns, and the son being 
near to death, desired to see his father, and confess his wrong-doing; but the 
stern old sire refused to look the rebel in the face. The young man being 
sorely troubled in his conscience, said to those about him, 'I am dying, take 
me 
from my bed, and let me lie in sackcloth and ashes, in token of my sorrow for 
my ingratitude to my father.' Thus he died, and when the tidings came to the 
old man outside the walls, that his boy had died in ashes, repentant for his 
rebellion, he threw himself upon the earth, like another David, and said, 
'Would God I had died for him.' The thought of his boy's broken heart touched 
the heart of the father. If ye, being evil, are overcome by your children's 
tears, how much more shall your Father who is in heaven find in your bemoanings 
and confessions an argument for the display of his pardoning love through 
Christ Jesus our Lord? This is the eloquence which God delights in, the broken 
heart and the contrite spirit.  
 


## Heart: Hardness of


Lightfoot says:: 'I have heard it more than once and again, from the sheriffs 
who took all the gunpowder plotters, and brought them up to London, that every 
night when they came to their lodging by the way, they had their music and 
dancing a good part of the night. One would think it strange that men in their 
case should be so merry.' More marvelous still is it that those between whom 
and death there is but a step, should sport away their time as if they should 
live on for ages. Though the place of torment is within a short march of all 
unregenerate men, yet see how they make mirth, grinning and jesting between the 
jaws of hell!  


## Heart: Its Aberrations


The compass on board an iron vessel is very subject to aberrations; yet, for 
all that, its evident desire is to be true to the pole. True hearts in this 
wicked world, and in this fleshly body, are all too apt to swerve, but they 
still show their inward and persistent tendency to point towards heaven and 
God. 
On board iron vessels it is a common thing to see a compass placed aloft, to be 
as much away from the cause of aberration as possible: a wise hint to us to 
elevate our affections and desires; the nearer to God the less swayed by 
worldly 
influences.  


## Heart: Must Be Renewed


A man may beat down the bitter fruit from an evil tree until he is weary; 
whilst the root abides in strength and vigor, the beating down of the present 
fruit will not hinder it from bringing forth more. This is the folly of some 
men; they set themselves with all earnestness and diligence against the 
appearing eruption of lust, but leaving the principle and root untouched, 
perhaps unsearched out, they make but little or no progress in this work of 
mortification.: John Owen.  
 


## Heart: Seat of Spiritual Disease


Some malady which you do not understand troubles and alarms you. The physician 
is called. Thinking that the illness proceeds from a certain inflammatory 
process on a portion of your skin, you anxiously direct his attention to the 
spot. Silently, but sympathizing, he looks at the place where you have bidden 
him look, and because you have bidden him look there, but soon he turns away. 
He is busy with an instrument on another part of your body. He presses his 
trumpet tube gently to your breast, and listens for the pulsations which 
faintly 
but distinctly pass through. He looks and listens there, and saddens as he 
looks. You again direct his attention to the cutaneous eruption which annoys 
you. He sighs and sits silent. When you reiterate your request that something 
should be done for the external eruption, he gently shakes his head, and 
answers 
not a word. From this silence you would learn the truth at last, you would not 
miss its meaning long. 
O miss not the meaning of the Lord when he points to the seat of the soul's 
disease: 'Ye WILL not come.' These, his enemies, dwell in your heart.: W. 
Arnot.  
 


## Heaven


'Who,' saith an old divine, 'chides a servant for taking away the first course 
at a feast when the second consists of far greater delicacies?' Who then can 
feel regret that this present world passeth away, when he sees that an eternal 
world of joy is coming? The first course is grace, but the second is glory, and 
that is as much better as the fruit is better than the blossom. 
 


## Heaven: a Sustaining Prospect


One Palmer, of Reading, being condemned to die, in Queen Mary's time, was much 
persuaded to recant, and among other things a friend said to him, 'Take pity on 
thy golden years and pleasant flowers of youth, before it be too late.' His 
reply was as beautiful as it was conclusive: 'Sir, I long for those springing 
flowers which shall never fade away.' When he was in the midst of the flames he 
exhorted his companions to constancy, saying, 'We shall not end our lives in 
the fire, but make a change for a better life; yea, for coals we shall receive 
pearls.' Thus do we clearly see, that although 'if in this life only we have 
hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable,' yet the prospect of a better 
and enduring substance enables us to meet all the trials and temptations of 
this present life with holy boldness and joy.  
 


## Heaven: an Incentive to Diligence


Julius Caesar coming towards Rome with his army, and hearing that the senate 
and people had fled from it, said, 'They that will not fight for this city, 
what city will they fight for?' If we will not take pains for the kingdom of 
heaven, what kingdom will we take pains for?  
 


## Heaven: Its Variety


We cannot stay to read the catalogue now, but heavenly joys shall be like the 
tree of life in the New Jerusalem, which, brings forth twelve manner of fruits, 
and yields her fruit ever month. Robert Hall used to cry, 'O for the 
everlasting rest!' but Wilberforce would sigh to dwell in unbroken love. Hall 
was a man who, suffered: he longed for rest; Wilberforce was a man of amiable 
spirit, loving society and fellowship: he looked for love. Hall shall have his 
rest, am Wilberforce shall have his love. There are joys at God' right hand, 
suitable for the spiritual tastes of all those who shall come thither. The 
heavenly manna tastes to every man's peculiar liking.  
 


## Heaven: None Admitted but Those like Jesus


At heaven's gate there stands an angel with charge to admit none but those who 
in their countenances bear the same features as the Lord of the place. Here 
comes a monarch with a crown upon his head. The angel pays him no respect, but 
reminds him that the diadems of earth have no value in heaven. A company of 
eminent men advance dressed in robes of state, and others adorned with the 
gowns of learning, but to these no deference is rendered, for their faces are 
very unlike the Crucified. A maiden comes forward, fair and comely, but the 
celestial watcher sees not in that sparkling eye and ruddy cheek the beauty for 
which he is looking. A man of renown cometh up heralded by fame, and preceded 
by 
the admiring clamour of mankind; but the angel saith, 'Such applause may please 
the sons of men, but thou hast no right to enter here.' But free admittance is 
always given to those who in holiness are made like their Lord. Poor they may 
have been; illiterate they may have been; but the angel as he looks at them 
smiles a welcome as he says, 'It is Christ again; a transcript of the holy 
child Jesus. Come in, come in; eternal glory thou shalt win. Thou shalt sit in 
heaven with Christ, for thou art like him.'  
 


## Heaven: Our Future Condition in


You will very often perceive in your rain-water certain ugly little things, 
which swim and twist about in it, always trying if they can to reach the 
surface and breathe through one end of their bodies. What makes these little 
things so lively, these innumerable little things like very small tadpoles, why 
are they so energetic? Possibly they have an idea of what they are going to be. 
The day will come when all of a sudden there will emerge from the case of the 
creature which now navigates your bason, a long-legged thing with two bright 
gauze-like wings, which will mount into the air, and on a summer's evening will 
dance in the sunlight. It is nothing more nor less than a gnat in one of its 
earliest stages. Mark in that creature an image of your present self; you are 
an undeveloped being; you have not your wings as yet, and are earthbound, and 
yet sometimes in your activity for Christ, when the strong desires for 
something better are upon you, you leap in foretaste of the bliss to come.  
 


## Heaven: to Be Shut Out of at Last


Several years ago we heard an old minister relate the following incident:: 'He 
had preached the Word for many a year in a wood hard by a beautiful village in 
the Inverness-shire Highlands, and it was his invariable custom, on dismissing 
his own congregation, to repair to the Baptist Chapel in this village to 
partake of the Lord's Supper with his people assembled there. It was then usual 
to shut the gates during this service, in order that communicants might not be 
exposed to any disturbance through persons going out or coming in. On one 
occasion the burden of the Lord pressed upon his servant with more than 
ordinary 
severity, and anxious to deliver it and clear his soul, he detained his hearers 
a little beyond the time, and consequently had to hurry to the chapel. As he 
drew near he noticed the door keeper retire from the outer gate, after having 
shut it. He called to him, quickening his pace at the same time, but his cry 
was 
not heard, the attendant retreated inside and the minister came up 'just in 
time' to see the door put to, and rear it fastened from within. He walked round 
the chapel looking up at the windows, but could gain no admittance; here was 
only one door, and that door was shut. He listened and heard the singing, and 
thought how happy God's people were inside, while he himself was shut out. The 
circumstance made an impression upon him at the time which he could never 
afterwards forget, and he was led to ask himself the question, 'Shall it be so 
at the last? Shall I come up to the gate of heaven only in time to be too late, 
to find the last ransomed one admitted, and the door everlastingly shut?'  
 


## Heavenward


My horse invariably comes home in less time than he makes the journey out. He 
pulls the carriage with a hearty goodwill when his face is towards home. Should 
not I also both suffer and labor the more joyously because my way lies towards 
heaven, and I am on pilgrimage to my Father's house, my soul's dear home and 
resting place?  
 


## Holy Water


Holy water, indeed! a vile mixture, neither fit for man nor beast. You see this 
liquid virtue at the doors of all the churches ready for the brows of the 
faithful, but what is far more curious, you observe it in little pots placed 
for use in the cemeteries; and that the passer-by may give the dead a showery 
benediction, there are little sprinkling brushes in the pots with which to 
scatter the precious mixture. A mother's tears over her dead babe are far more 
in place than such foolery. Holy water! bah! See how the rain pours down from 
yonder black cloud which has passed over the rugged crags of Pilatus; that sort 
of holy water is infinitely more likely to moisten the clay of the defunct, and 
bring plenteous blessing to the living, than all the hogsheads of aqueous fluid 
that priests ever mumbled over. Holy water, indeed! If there be such a thing, 
it trickles from the eye of penitence, bedews the cheek of gratitude, and falls 
upon the page of holy Scripture when the word is applied with power. Standing 
where, when the rain is over, one can see the fair Lake of Cucerne brimming 
with crystal, and the clouds among the Alpine peaks all charged with moisture, 
rendered golden by the sun's clear shining, one feels indignant at the idea 
that the little driblets of nastiness in yonder pots and shells should be 
venerated, and all nature's reservoirs accounted common or unclean. It needs no 
small measure of prudence to restrain a man from tumbling pots and pans and 
holy liquids headlong to the ground. Human folly, how far wilt thou not go when 
priests lead thee by the nose!  
 


## Hope


Once on a time, certain strong laborers were sent forth by the great King to 
level a primeval forest, to plough it, to sow it, and to bring to him the 
harvest. They were stout-hearted and strong, and willing enough for labor, and 
much they needed all their strength and more. One stalwart laborer was named 
Industry: consecrated work was his. His brother Patience, with thews of steel, 
went with him, and tired not in the longest days under the heaviest labors. To 
help them they had Zeal, clothed with ardent and indomitable energy. Side by 
side there stood his kinsman Self-denial, and his friend Importunity. These 
went forth to their labor, and they took with them, to cheer their toils, their 
well-beloved sister Hope; and well it was they did, for they needed the music 
of her consolation ere the work was done, for the forest trees were huge and 
demanded many sturdy blows of the axe ere they would fall prone upon the 
ground. One by one the giant forest kings were overthrown, but the labor was 
immense and incessant. At night when they went to their rest, the day's work 
always seemed so light, for as they crossed the threshold, Patience, wiping the 
sweat from his brow, would be encouraged, and Self-denial would be strengthened 
by hearing the sweet voice of Hope within singing, 'God will bless us, God, 
even 
our own God, will bless us.' They felled the lofty trees to the music of that 
strain; they cleared the acres one by one, they tore from their sockets the 
hug' 
roots, they delved the soil, they sowed the corn, and waited for the harvest, 
often much discouraged, but still held to their work as by silver chains and 
golden fetters by the sweet sound of the voice which chanted so constantly, 
'God, ever our own God, will bless us.' They never could refrain from service, 
for Hope never could refrain from song. They were ashamed to be discouraged, 
they were shocked to be despairing, for still the voice rang clearly out at 
noon 
and eventide, 'God will bless us, God, even our own God, will bless us.' You 
know the parable, you recognise the voice: may you hear it in your souls 
to-day! 
 
 


## Hope (2)


It is reported that in the Tamul language there is no word for hope. Alas! poor 
men, if we were all as destitute of the blessed comfort itself as these Tamul 
speakers are of the word! What must be the misery of souls in hell where they 
remember the word, but can never know hope itself!  
 


## Humility and Cheerpulness


'Observe the peculiar characters of the grass which adapt it especially for the 
service of man, are its apparent humility and cheerfulness. Its humility, in 
that it seems created only for lowest service, appointed to be trodden on, and 
fed upon. Its cheerfulness, in that it seems to exult under all kinds of 
violence and suffering. You roll it, and it is the stronger the next day; you 
mow it, and it multiplies its shoots, as if it were grateful; you tread upon 
it, and it only sends up richer perfume. Spring comes, and it rejoices with all 
the earth, glowing with variegated flame of flowers, waving in soft depth of 
fruitful strength. Winter comes, and though it will not mock its fellow plants 
by growing then, it will not pine and mourn, and turn colourless or leafless as 
they. It .is always green, and is only the brighter and gayer for the 
hoarfrost.'  So Ruskin poetically writes of the grass; should it not be thus 
with believers? Their flesh is like to grass for perishing, it were well if 
their spirits were like to grass for humility and cheerfulness in service. 
 


## Humility


Wise men know their own ignorance and are ever ready to learn. Humility is the 
child of knowledge. Michael Angelo was found by the Cardinal Earnese walking in 
solitude amid the ruins of the Coliseum, and when he expressed his surprise, 
the great artist answered, 'I go yet to school that I may continue to learn.' 
Who among us can after this talk of finishing our education? We have need to 
learn of all around us. He must be very foolish who cannot tell us something; 
or 
more likely we must be more foolish not to be able to learn of him.  


## Humility (2)


The whole Roman language, even with all the improvements of the Augustan age, 
does not afford so much as a name for humility (the word from whence we borrow 
this, as is well known, bearing in Latin a quite different meaning), no, nor 
was one found in all the copious language of the Greeks, till it was made by 
the great Apostle.John Wesley.  
 


## Humility (2)


'Of all trees, I observe, God hath chosen the vine, a low plant that creeps, 
upon the helpful wall; of all beasts, the soft and patient lamb; of all fouls, 
the mild and guileless dove. Christ is the rose of the field, and the lily of 
the valley. When God appeared to Moses, it was not in the lofty cedar, nor the 
sturdy oak, nor the spreading plane; but in a bush, a humble, slender, abject 
shrub; as if he would, by these elections, check the conceited arrogance of 
man.': Owen Feltham.  
 


## Hypocrisy


In the olden times even the best rooms were usually of bare brick or stone, 
damp, and moldy, but over these in great houses when the family was resident, 
were hung up arras or hangings of rich materials, between which and the wall 
persons might conceal themselves, so that literally walls had ears. It is to be 
feared that many a brave show of godliness is but an arras to conceal rank 
hypocrisy; and this accounts for some men's religion being but occasional, 
since it is folded up or exposed to view as need may demand. Is there no room 
for conscience to pry between thy feigned profession and thy real ungodliness, 
and bear witness against thee? Remember, if conscience do it not, certainly 
'the watcher and the Holy One' will make a thorough search within thee.  
 


## Hypocrisy (2)


In the pursuit of pastoral duty, I stood a little while ago in a cheesemonger's 
shop, and being in a fidgety humour, and having a stick in my hand, I did what 
most Englishmen are sure to do, I was not content with seeing, but must needs 
touch as well. My stick came gently upon a fine cheese in the window, and to my 
surprise a most metallic sound emanated from it. The sound was rather hollow, 
or one might have surmised that all the tasteholes had been filled up with 
sovereigns, and thus the cheese had been greatly enriched, and the merchant had 
been his own banker. There was, however, a sort of crockery jingle in the 
sound, like the ring of a huge bread or milk pan, such as our country friends 
use so abundantly; and I came to the very correct conclusion that I had found a 
very well got-up hypocrite in the shop window. Mark, from this time, when I 
pass 
by, I mentally whisper, 'Pottery;' and the shams may even be exchanged for 
realities, but I shall be long in believing it. In my mind the large stock has 
dissolved into potsherds, and the fine show in the window only suggests the 
potter's vessel. The homely illustration is simply introduced because we find 
people of this sort in our churches, looking extremely like what they should 
be, yet having no substance in them, so that if; accidentally, one happens to 
tap them somewhere or other with sudden temptation or stern duty, the baked 
earth gives forth its own ring, and the pretender is esteemed no longer.  
 


## Hypocrisy (2)


The shops in the square of San Marco were all religiously closed, for the day 
was a high festival: we were much disappointed, for it was our last day, and we 
desired to take away with us some souvenirs of lovely Venice; but our regret 
soon vanished, for on looking at the shop we meant to patronise, we readily 
discovered signs of traffic within. We stepped to the side door, and found when 
one or two other customers had been served, that we might purchase to our 
heart's content, saint or no saint. After this fashion too many keep the laws 
of God to the eye, but violate them in the heart. The shutters are up as if the 
man no more dealt with sin and Satan; but a brisk commerce is going on behind 
the scenes. From such deceit may the Spirit of truth preserve us.  
 


## Hypocrisy: a Fall Fatal


'The meteor, if it once fall, cannot be rekindled.' When those who once flashed 
before the eyes of the religious public with the blaze of a vain profession, 
fall into open and scandalous sin, it is impossible to renew their glory. Once 
break the egg of hypocrisy, and who can repair the damage?  
 


## Hypocrisy: Easy but Dangerous


The counterfeit will always have some admirers, from its cheapness in the 
market. One must dig deep in dark mines for gold and silver; the precious 
treasure must be brought from far across the seas; it must be melted down, it 
must pass through many assays, and the dies must be worked with ponderous 
engines before the coin can be produced; all this to the sluggish many is a 
heavy disadvantage. Hush! hearken! steal silently upstairs; the spirit of 
deceit invites you to her chamber; a little plaster of Paris, a fire, a 
crucible,. molten lead, the mould, and there is your money, sir, without 
troubling Peru, Potosi, California, or the Mint. Slink out and change your fine 
new shillings, and your fortune's made without the ignoble waste of sweat and 
labour. But be quiet, for a detective may be near, a coarse-minded minion of 
unpoetic law, who may cruelly block up your road, or even lead you into prison. 
Short cuts to wealth have brought many to the hulks; and, let me add, there are 
short cuts to godliness which have brought many to perdition!  
 


## Hypocrisy: of No Service


Coals of fire cannot be concealed beneath the most sumptuous apparel, they-will 
betray themselves with smoke and flame; nor can darling sins be long hidden 
beneath the most ostentatious profession, they will sooner or later discover 
themselves, and burn sad holes in the man's reputation. Sin needs quenching in 
the Saviour's blood, not concealing under the garb of religion.  
 


## Hypocrisy: Present Age Suitable to


There was an age of chivalry, when no craven courted knighthood, for it 
involved the hard blows, the dangerous wounds, the rough unhorsings, and the 
ungentle perils of the tournament; nay, these were but child's play: there were 
distant eastern fields, where Paynim warriors must be slain by valiant hands, 
and blood must flow in rivers from the Red-cross knights. Then men who lacked 
valour preferred their hawks and their jesters, and left heroes to court death 
and glory on the battle-field. This genial time of peace breeds carpet knights, 
who flourish their untried weapons, and bear the insignia of valour, without 
incurring its inconvenient toils. Many are crowding to the seats of the heroes, 
since prowess and patience are no more required. The war is over, and every man 
is willing to enlist. When Rome commenced her long career of victory, it was no 
pleasant thing to be a soldier in the Roman legions. The power which smote the 
nations like a rod of iron abroad, was a yoke of iron at home. There were long 
forced marches, with hunger and cold and weariness; heavy armour was the usual 
load when the legionary marched at ease; but 'ease' was a word he seldom used. 
Rivers were forded; mountains were scaled; barbarians were attacked; proud 
nations were assailed; kingdoms were subdued. No toil too stern for the scarred 
veteran, no odds too heavy, no onslaught too ferocious, no arms too terrible. 
Scarcely were his wounds healed, ere he was called to new fields; his life was 
battle; his home the tent; his repast was plunder; his bed the battle-field; 
while the eagle's bloody talons removed all need of sepulchre for his 
slaughtered body. But afterwards when Rome was mistress of the world, and the 
Pratorian cohorts could sell the imperial purple to the highest bidder, many 
would follow the legions to share their spoils. It is not otherwise to-day. 
Into the triumphs of martyrs and confessors few are unwilling to enter; in a 
national respect to religion, which is the result of their holiness, even 
ungodly men are willing to share. They have gone before us with true hearts 
valiant for truth, and false traitors are willing to divide their spoils.  
 


## Hypocrites: Discovered on Nearer Inspection


How many are like that famous painting of the olden time, in which the artist 
depicted what seemed at a distance a holy friar with a book before him, and his 
hands crossed in devotion, looking like a saint indeed, but when you came close 
to the venerable impostor, you found that his hands, though clasped, enclosed a 
lemon, and instead of a book there was a punch-bowl into which he was squeezing 
the juice. To seem to be, answers men's purposes so well, that it is little 
marvel if pretenders swarm like the flies in Egypt's plague; yet if they would 
remember the last great day, men would abhor hypocrisy.  
 


## Hypocrites: Season for


After a refreshing shower which has made all the flowers to smile till the 
teardrops of joy stand in their eyes, you will see your garden-paths spotted 
over with slugs and snails. These creatures lay concealed till the genial rain 
called them forth to make their slimy way towards whatsoever they might devour. 
After this fashion revivals, of necessity, develop hypocrites, yet who would 
deplore the shower because of the snails, and who would rail at 'times of 
refreshing' because mere pretenders are excited to make a base profession of a 
grace to which they are strangers?  
 


## Hypocrites: Seeking Their Own Advantage


God is in the hypocrite's mouth, but the world is in his heart, which he 
expects to gain through his good reputation. I have read of one that offered 
his 
prince a great sum of money to have leave once or twice a-day to come into his 
presence, and only say, 'God save your Majesty!' The prince wondering at this 
large offer for so small a favor, asked him, 'What advantage would this afford 
him?' 'O sire,' saith he, 'this, though I have nothing else at your hands, will 
get me a name in the country for one who is a great favorite at court, and such 
an opinion will help me to more at the year's end, than it costs me for the 
purchase.'  
Thus some, by the name they get for great saints, advance their worldly 
interests, which lie at the bottom of all their profession.: Gurnali.  
 


## Hypocrites: Their Sinister Motives


See yonder eagle, how it mounts! Does it care for the ethereal blue, or aspire 
to commune with the stars of heaven! Not a whit; such airy considerations have 
no weight with the ravenous bird; and yet you will not wonder that it soars 
aloft when you remember that it thus obtains a broader range of vision, and so 
becomes the more able to provide for its nest. The bird mounts towards heaven, 
but it keeps its eye evermore upon the outlook for its prey. No celestial 
impulse is needed, its love of blood suffices to bear it aloft. It soars only 
that it may flash downwards with fell swoop upon the object of its desires. 
Wonder not that men with the hearts of devils yet mount like angels: there is a 
reason which explains it all.  
 


## Hypocritical Confessions


You have beard, no doubt, of beggars who tie a leg up when they go a-begging, 
and then make a hideous lamentation of their lameness. Why, this is just your 
case, sir, when you go to church a-praying, which is begging, you tie your 
righteous heart up, and then make woeful outcry for mercy on us miserable 
sinners. 0 sir, these tricks may pass a while unnoticed, but Jesus Christ will 
apprehend such cheats at last, and give them their desert.: John Berridge.  
 


## Ignorance


Payson well says,' Oh! when we meet in heaven, we shall see how little we knew 
about it on earth.'  
 


## Ignorance: of OneìS Own Heart


'After all, I do not hate God. No, sir; you will not make me believe that. I am 
a sinner, I know, and do many wicked things; but after all, I have a good 
heart: I don't hate God.' Such was the language of a prosperous worldling. He 
was sincere, but sadly deceived. A few months afterwards, that God who had 
given 
him so many good things, crossed his path in an unexpected manner. A fearful 
torrent swept down the valley, and threatened destruction to this man's large 
flour mill. A crowd were watching it, in momentary expectation of seeing it 
fall, while the owner, standing in the midst of them, was cursing God to his 
face, and pouring out the most horrid oaths.  
He no longer doubted or denied that he hated God. But nothing in that hour of 
trial came out of his mouth which was not previously in his heart. God's 
account of the unrenewed heart is true: it is 'deceitful above all things,' as 
well as 'desperately wicked.' He who is wise will believe God's account of the 
state of his heart by nature, rather than the deceitful heart's account of 
itself.  
 


## Ignorance: Possible in Most Constant Hearers


Samuel Wesley visited one of his parishioners as he was upon his dying bed: a 
man who had never missed going to church in forty years. 'Thomas, where do you 
think your soul will go?'  'Soul! soul!' said Thomas. 'Yes, sir,' said Mr. 
Wesley, 'do you not know what your soul is?' 'Ay, surely,' said Thomas; 'why, 
it is a little bone in the back that lives longer than the body.' 'So much,' 
says John Wesley, who related it on the authority of Dr. Lupton, who had it 
from 
his father, 'had Thomas learned from hearing sermons, and exceedingly good 
sermons, for forty years.': Anecdotes of the Wesleys. By The Rev. J. B. 
Wakeley. 
 


## Imitation: of Good Men Its Limit


Plutarch says that among the Persians those persons were considered most 
beautiful who were hawk-nosed, for no other reason than that Cyrus had such a 
nose. In Richard the Third's court humps upon the back were the height of 
fashion. According as the various potentates who have condescended to rule 
mankind have lisped, or stuttered, or limped, or squinted, or spoken through 
their noses, these infirmities have been elevated into graces and commanded the 
admiration of silly mortals. But is there not more than a possibility that what 
we ridicule in the kingdoms of earth may have its counterpart in the church? Is 
there not a tendency among Christians to imitate the spiritual infirmities of 
their religious leaders, or oftener still of departed saints? We may follow 
holy men so far as they follow Christ; the mischief is that we do not readily 
stop where we should, but rather where we should not. Bunyan, Whitfield, 
Wesley, Calvin, Luther, yes, by all means imitate them: but not 
indiscriminately, not slavishly, or you will do so ridiculously. One is your 
Master, to copy him in every jot and tittle will be safe enough.  
 


## Immutability of God


There be many Christians most like unto young sailors, who think the shore and 
the whole land doth move when they ship, and they themselves are moved. Just so 
not a few do imagine that God moveth, and saileth, and changeth places, because 
their giddy souls are under sail, and subject to alteration, to ebbing and 
flowing. But the foundation of the Lord abideth sure.: Samuel Rutherford.  
 


## Inactivity: the Evils of


What a mournful sight the observer may see in some of the outskirts of our huge 
city; row after row of houses all untenanted and forlorn. The owners had far 
better let them at the lowest rent than suffer them to remain empty, for the 
boys make targets of the windows, enterprising purveyors for the marine store 
shops rend off all the lead, thieves purloin every movable fitting, damp swells 
the window frames and doors, and mustiness makes the whole place wretched to 
all the senses; into the bargain the district gets a bad name which it probably 
never loses. Better a poor tenant than a house running to ruin unused. The 
similitude may well suggest the desirableness of an object and a service to 
those Christians whose time is wasted in slothful ease. All sorts of mischief 
happen to unoccupied professors of religion; there is no evil from which they 
are secure; better would it be for them to accept the lowest occupation for the 
Lord Jesus, than remain the victims of inaction.  
 


## Inconsistencies


The orthodox Greek churchman is scandalised at the image-worship of the 
Romanist; it is flat idolatry, and he denounces it vehemently. But what are 
those pictures in the Russian churches, many of them made to stand out in 
relief with solid plates of gold and silver? Why, these are pictures of the 
Virgin or of her Son, as the case may be, and your anti-idolatrous Greek bows 
before these with voluntary humility. He hates image-worship, you see, but 
stands up for picture-worship. Behold how sinners disagree in name and unite in 
spirit! Put Greek and Roman in a sack together, and let the greatest idolater 
out first: the wisest solution would be to keep them both in the sack, for 
Solomon himself would be puzzled to select the most guilty. Are there not such 
inconsistencies among ourselves? Do we not condemn in one form what we allow in 
another? Do we not censure in our neighbours what we allow in ourselves? This 
query need not be answered in a hurry; the reply will be the more extensive for 
a little waiting.  
 


## Inconsistency


Mark Antony once yoked two lions together, and drove them through the streets 
of Rome, but no human skill can ever yoke together the Lion of the Tribe of 
Judah and the Lion of the Pit. I did see a man once trying to walk on both 
sides 
of the street at one time, but he was undoubtedly drunk; and when we see a man 
labouring day by day to walk on both sides of the street, morally: in the shady 
side of sin and the sunny side of holiness, or reeling in the evening, at one 
time towards the bright lights of virtue, and anon staggering back to sin in 
dark places, where no lamp is shining: we say of him, 'He is morally 
intoxicated,' and wisdom adds, 'He is mad, and if the Great Physician heal him 
not, his madness will bring him to destruction.'  
 


## Inconsistency: Glossed over


'Silk is interdicted by Mussulman law as being an excrement. They elude this 
prohibition by mixing a very little cotton with it.' After the same manner it 
is growing too common at what are called Penny Readings, to indulge in. the 
idlest jesting and absurdity, and then to pass off the whole entertainment 
respectably by singing the doxology, or pronouncing the benediction; the 
religion being to the foolery, in the proportion of the bread to the sack in 
Falstaff's reckoning. Do men imagine that Christ's laws are to be as easily 
evaded as Mahomet's? Do they dream that the 'very little cotton' will sanctify 
all the forbidden fabric? The, illustration may be applied in many other ways 
besides that which we have here indicated.  
 


## Indolence: a Shameful Sickness


There once lived in Ghent a beggar, who was accustomed to collect alms upon the 
pretence that he had a secret disease lying in his bones and weakening his 
whole body, and that he dared not for shame mention the name of it. This appeal 
was exceedingly successful, until a person in authority more curious than the 
rest, insisted upon following him, and examining him at home. At last the 
beggar confessed as follows:: 'That which pains me you see not; but I have a 
shameful disease in my bones, so that I cannot work; some call it sloth, and 
others term it idleness.' Alas! that so many in our churches should be so far 
gone with THIS SAME SICKNESS.  
 


## Infirmities: Use of


'Someof the arable land along the shore on the southeast coast of Sutherland, 
is almost covered with shore stones, from the size of a turkey's egg to eight 
pounds weight. Several experiments have been made to collect these off the 
land, expecting a better crop; but in every case the land proved less 
productive 
by removing them; and on some small spots of land it was found so evident, that 
they were spread on the land again, to ensure their usual crop of oats or 
pease.' We would fain be rid of all our infirmities which, to our superficial 
conceptions, appear to be great hindrances to our usefulness, and yet it is 
most questionable if we should bring forth any fruit unto God without them. 
Much rather, therefore, will I glory in infirmities that the power of Christ 
may 
rest upon me.  
 


## Influence


Lord Peterborough speaking on one occasion of the celebrated FÃ©nÃ©lon, 
observed:: 'He is a delicious creature; I was forced to get away from him as 
fast as I possibly could, else he would have made me pious.' Would to God that 
all of us had such an influence over godless men.  
 


## Ingratitude: to God


The Staubach is a fall of remarkable magnificence, seeming to leap from heaven; 
its glorious stream reminds one of the abounding mercy which in a mighty 
torrent descends from above. In the winter, when the cold is severe, the water 
freezes at the foot of the fall, and rises up in huge icicles like stalagmites, 
until it reaches the fall itself as though it sought to bind it in the same icy 
fetters. How like is this to the common conduct of men! Divine favors frozen by 
human ingratitude, are proudly lifted in rebellion against the God who gave 
them.  
 


## Insignificant Subjects: Not Fit for the Pulpit


Carlyle in narrating an instance of the preservation of etiquette at the court 
of Louis XVI., while the mob were demanding entrance into his private 
apartments, and the empire was going to pieces, compares it to the 
house-cricket still chirping amid the pealing of the trump of doom. When 
trivial 
subjects are descanted upon from the pulpit, while souls are perishing for lack 
of knowledge, the same comparison may be used; as for instance, when a 
congregation is collected, and the preacher talks about the drying up of the 
Euphrates, or ventilates his pet theory for reconciling Moses and geology. Why 
cannot these things be kept for other assemblies? What can the man be at? Nero 
fiddling over burning Rome is nothing to it! Even the women knitting in front 
of 
the guillotine were not more coolly cruel. We tolerate the cricket for his 
incongruous chirp; but go to, thou silly trifler at the sacred desk, we cannot 
frame excuse for thee, or have patience with thee.  
 


## Interest: in Holy Work to Be Maintained


It is of the utmost importance to keep up our interest in the holy work in 
which we are engaged, for the moment our interest flags the work will become 
wearisome. Humboldt says that the copper-coloured native of central America, 
far more accustomed than the European traveller to the burning heat of the 
climate, yet complains more when upon a journey, because he is stimulated by no 
interest. The same Indian who would complain, when in botanising he was loaded 
with a box full of plants, would row his canoe fourteen or fifteen hours 
together against the current without a murmur, because he wished to return to 
his family. Labours of love are light. Routine is a hard master. Love much, and 
you can do much. Impossibilities disappear when zeal is fervent.  
 


## Invitations of the Gospel: the SinnerìS Warrant


In the courts of law if a man be called as a witness, no sooner is his name 
mentioned, though he may be at the end of the court, than he begins to force 
his way up to the witness box. Nobody says, 'Why is this man pushing here?' or, 
if they should say, 'Who are you?' would be a sufficient answer to say, 'My 
name was called.' 'But you are not rich, you have no gold ring upon your 
finger!' 'No, but that is not my right of way, but I was called.' 'Sir, you are 
not a man of repute, or rank, or character!' 'It matters not, I was called. 
Make 
way.' So make way, ye doubts and fears, make way, ye devils of the infernal 
lake, Christ calls the sinner. Sinner, come, for though thou hast nought to 
recommend thee, yet it is written, 'Him that cometh unto me I will in no wise 
cast out.'  
 


## Irascible Persons: Not to Be Provoked


In the Jardin des Plantes we saw a hooded snake in a most unamiable condition 
of temper. There was a thick glass and a stout wire between us, and we did 
nothing but look at him, yet he persisted in darting at us with the utmost 
vehemence of malice, until the keeper requested us to move away, with the 
advice 
that it was not well to irritate such creatures. When one meets with an 
irascible person, on the look out to pick a quarrel, ill conditioned, and out 
of 
elbows with the whole world, it is best to move on, and let him alone. Even if 
he can do you no harm, and if his irritation be utterly unreasonable, it is 
best 
to remove all exciting causes of provocation, for it is never wise to irritate 
vipers. You do not on purpose walk heavily across the floor to teach a gouty 
man 
that you have no respect for his tender feelings since he ought not to be so 
susceptible; neither should you vex those afflicted with a bad temper, and then 
plead that they have no right to be so excitable. If our neighbours' tempers 
are 
gunpowder, let us not play with fire.  
 


## Jesuits


The cat having a long time preyed upon the mice, the poor creatures at last, 
for their safety, contained themselves within their holes; but the cat finding 
his prey to cease, as being known to the mice that he was indeed their enemy 
and 
a cat, deviseth this course following, namely, changeth his hue, getting on a 
religious habit, shaveth his crown, walks gravely by their holes; and yet 
perceiving that the mice kept their holes, and looking out, suspected the 
worst, he formally, and father-like, said unto them, 'Quodfueram non sum, 
frater, caftul aspice fonsum: O brother, I am not as you take me for; I am no 
more a cat; see my habit and shaven crown.' Hereupon some of the more credulous 
and bold among them were again, by this deceit, snatched up; and therefore when 
afterwards he came, as before, to entice them forth, they would come out no 
more, but answered, 'Talk what you can, we will never believe you; you bear 
still a cat's heart within you.' And so here the Jesuits, yea, and priests too, 
for they are all joined in the tails, like Samson's foxes: Ephraim against 
Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both against Judah.: Sir E. Coke.  
JOY: at Finding Salvation.  
We are told of some Turks, who have, upon the sight of Mahomet's tomb, put out 
their eyes, that they might not defile them, forsooth, with any common object, 
after they had been blessed with seeing one so sacred. I am sure many gracious 
souls there have been, who, with a prospect of. heaven's glory set before the 
eye of their faith, have been so ravished by the sight, that they desired God 
even to seal up their eyes by death, with Simeon, who would not by his 
good-will have lived a day after that blessed hour in which his eyes had beheld 
the salvation of God.: W. Gurnall.  
JOY OF OUR RELIGION: as an Evidence of its Truth.  
How I long for my bed! Not that I may sleep: I lie awake often and long! but to 
hold sweet communion with my God. What shall I render unto him for all his 
revelations and gifts to me? Were there no historical evidence of the truth of 
Christianity, were there no well-established miracles, still I should believe 
that the religion propagated by the fishermen of Galilee is divine. The holy 
joys it brings to me must be from heaven. Do I write this boastingly, brother? 
Nay, it is with tears of humble gratitude that I tell of the goodness of the 
Lord.': Extract from a Private Letter from Bapa Padmanji, one of the Native 
Converts in India.  
 


## Judgment--Comparable to Balances


Our judgment may be compared to the scales and weights of the merchant. It 
should be correct, but it seldom is quite accurate; even ordinary wear and tear 
in this world will suffice to put it out of gear. We had need call in the 
Rectifier full often, and entreat him to search out our secret shortcomings, 
lest we deviate from equity and know it not. It would be well if the scales of 
conscience would turn even at the finest dust, but how rarely is this the case! 
False weights and balances are an abomination unto the Lord, yet many use them, 
they weigh their neighbours so as to underestimate them, and they use balances 
far too favourable to themselves; they give the Lord a portion sadly too small, 
and to their own pleasures a dowry much too great. Tradesmen who have one set 
of weights to buy with and others to sell with, are evidently rogues, and we 
may convict ourselves of injustice at once if we find ourselves severe to other 
mn and lenient to ourselves. Fraudulent shopkeepers will use a movable piece of 
metal, by removing which they can lighten the weight or the scale, and we too 
may have a convenient indignation which we may restrain or indulge according as 
the person whose fault we judge may be the object of our goodwill or our 
displeasure. Some of the marine-store dealers, and buyers of kitchen-stuff at 
the back door, pretend to judge of weight by the feeling of their hand, and 
herein they are no worse than those who settle everything by prejudice and will 
not wait for reason. A railway traveller assured me that he had been weighed a 
dozen times at different stations, and only twice did the machines give the 
same report, his opinion of their correctness was not very high; for the same 
reason, of how little worth are the opinions of the many as to the preachers of 
the gospel, for scarcely two in a score are of the same mind! There is a great 
weighing time coming, for which it will be well to be prepared, for woe unto 
the man whom the infallible balances shall find wanting.  
 


## Judgment-Day: Forgotten




## Judgment: Perverted


 


## Judgments: Effects of

 
 


## Kingdom of Christ: Its Glories


 


## Knowledge: Lies Not in Mere Words


I heard two persons on the Wengern Alp talking by the hour together of the 
names of ferns; not a word about their characteristics, uses, or habits, but a 
medley of crack-jaw titles, and nothing more. They evidently felt that they 
were ventilating their botany, and kept each other in countenance by alternate 
volleys of nonsense. Well, friend, they were about as sensible as those 
doctrinalists who for ever talk over the technicalities of religion, but know 
nothing by experience of its spirit and power. Are we not all too apt to amuse 
ourselves after the same fashion? He who knows mere Linnaen names, but has 
never seen a flower, is as reliable in botany, as he is in theology who can 
descant upon supralapsarianism, but has never known the love of Christ in his 
heart.  
'True religion's more than doctrine, 
Something must be known and felt.'  
 


## Lethargy of Soul


Two of my hearers perished by a fire in their own house. They were not consumed 
by the flames, but they were suffocated by the smoke. No blaze was ever 
visible, nor could any remarkable sign of fire be seen from the Street, yet 
they 
died as readily as if they had been burned to ashes by raging flames. In this 
way sin also is deadly. Comparatively few of our hearers are destroyed by 
outrageous and flaming vices, such as blasphemy, theft, drunkenness, or 
uncleanness; but crowds of them are perishing by that deadly smoke of 
indifference which casts its stifling clouds of carelessness around them, and 
sends them asleep into everlasting destruction. O that they could be saved from 
the smoke as well as from the flame!  
 


## Life of Tre Believer: Interesting


I heard a gentleman assert that he could walk almost any number of miles when 
the scenery was good; but, he added, 'When it is flat and uninteresting, how 
one tires!' What scenery enchants the Christian pilgrim; the towering mountains 
of predestination, the great sea of providence, the rocks of sure promise, the 
green fields of revelation, the river that makes glad the city of God, all 
these compose the scenery which surrounds the Christian, and at every step 
fresh sublimities meet his view.  
 


## Life


John Mackintosh thus writes to his biographer, Norman Macleod:: 'May it not be 
said that the movement of our age is towards life? I sometimes fancy that I can 
discern three epochs in the Reformed Churches, corresponding in the main to 
those three weighty epithets: via, yenta:, vita. The Reformers themselves, no 
doubt, laid the stress chiefly upon the first (via). It was on this Popery had 
gone most astray, obscuring the doctrine of justification by faith alone. The 
epoch following was essentially dogmatic (veritas), when the doctors drew up 
'systems' of the truth. It was now, indeed, Christ as veritas! but the dogma 
taken alone led to coldness, dogmatism, sectarianism, and formality. Happy will 
it be for the church, if, not forgetting the other two, she shall now be found 
moving on to the third development of Christ as vita: the life, which will 
regulate the two former aspects, while it consummates and informs them. This l 
must develop the individual, and on individuals the church depends; for in 
God's sight it is no abstraction.'  
 


## Life: Explains Religion


ONE of our party greatly needed some elder-flower water for her face upon which 
the sun was working great mischief. It was in the Italian town of Varallo, and 
not a word of Italian did I know. I entered a chemist's shop and surveyed his 
drawers and bottles, but the result was nil. Bright thought, I would go down by 
the river, and walk until I could gather a bunch of elder-flowers, for the tree 
was then in bloom. Happily the search was successful: the flowers were 
exhibited to the druggist, the extract was procured. When you cannot tell in so 
many words what true religion is, exhibit it by your actions. Show by your life 
what grace can do. There is no language in the world so eloquent as a holy 
life. 
Men may doubt what you say, but they will believe what you do.  
 


## Life: Power of the Inner


On a winter's day I have noticed a row of cottages, with a deep load of snow on 
their several roofs; but as the day wore on, large fragments began to tumble 
from the eaves of this one and that other, till, by-and-by, there was a 
simultaneous avalanche, and the whole heap slid over in powdery ruin on the 
pavement, and before the sun went down you saw each roof as clear and dry as on 
a summer's eve. But here and there you would observe one with its snow-mantle 
unbroken, and a ruff of stiff icicles around it. What made the difference? The 
difference was to be found within. Some of these huts were empty, or the lonely 
inhabitant cowered over a scanty fire; whilst the peopled hearth and the high- 
blazing fagots of the rest created such an inward warmth that grim winter 
melted and relaxed his gripe; and the loosened mass folded off and tumbled over 
on the trampled street. It is possible by some outside process to push the main 
volume of snow from the frosty roof, or chip off the icicles one by one. But 
they will form again, and it needs an inward heat to create a total thaw. And 
so, by sundry processes, you may clear off from a man's conduct the dead weight 
of conspicuous sins; but it needs a hidden heat, a vital warmth within, to 
produce such a separation between the soul and its besetting iniquities, that 
the whole wintry incubus, the entire body of sin, will come spontaneously away. 
That vital warmth is the love of God abundantly shed abroad: the kindly glow 
which the Comforter diffuses in the soul which he makes his home. His genial 
inhabitation thaws that soul and its favourite sins asunder, and makes the 
indolence and self-indulgence and indevotion fall off from their old 
resting-place on that dissolving heart. The easiest form of self-mortification 
is a fervent spirit.: James Hamilton, D.D.  
 


## Life: Reviewed


Here is a good searching question for a man to ask himself as he reviews his 
past life:: Have I written in the snow? Will my life-work endure the lapse of 
years and the fret of change? Has there been anything immortal in it, which 
will survive the speedy wreck of all sublunary things? The boys inscribe their 
names in capitals in the snow, and in 'the morning's thaw the writing 
disappears; will it be so with my work, or will the characters which I have 
carved outlast the brazen tablets of history? Have I written in the snow?  
 


## Life: Spiritual


How like to a Christian a man may be and yet possess no vital godliness! Walk 
through the British Museum, and you will see all the orders of animals standing 
in their various places, and exhibiting themselves with the utmost possible 
propriety. The rhinoceros demurely retains the position in which he was set at 
first, the eagle soars not through the window, the wolf howls not at night; 
every creature, whether bird, beast, or fish, remains in the particular glass 
case allotted to it; but we all know that these are not the creatures, but only 
the outward semblances of them. Yet in what do they differ? Certainly in 
nothing which you could readily see, for the well-stuffed animal is precisely 
like what the living animal would have been; and that eye of glass even appears 
to have more of brightness in it than the natural eye of the creature itself; 
there is a secret inward something lacking, which, when it has once departed, 
you cannot restore. So in the churches of Christ, many professors are not 
living 
believers, but stuffed Christians. They possess all the externals of religion, 
and every outward morality that you could desire; they behave with great 
propriety, they keep their places, and there is no outward difference between 
them and the true believer, except upon the vital point, the life which no 
power 
on earth can possibly confer. There is this essential distinction, spiritual 
life is absent.  
 


## Life: the Hidden


Standing by the telegraphic wires one may often hear the mystic wailing and 
sighing of the winds among them, like the strains of an Aolian harp, but one 
knows nothing of the message which is flashing along them. Joyous may be the 
inner language of those wires, swift as the lightning, far- reaching and full 
of meaning, but a stranger intermeddles not therewith. Fit emblem of the 
believer's inner life; men hear our notes of outward sorrow wrung from us by 
external circumstances, but the message of celestial peace, the divine 
communings with a better land, the swift heart-throbs of heaven-born desire, 
they cannot perceive: the carnal see but the outer manhood, but the life hidden 
with Christ in God, flesh and blood cannot discern.  
 


## Life: the Need of the Sinner


WE visited two palaces in Venice, and realized the contrast of life and death. 
The first was tenanted by a noble family, who delighted to maintain it in good 
repair, to adorn it with fresh beauties, and to furnish it in the most 
sumptuous manner. Everything was fresh, fair, bright, and charming. From the 
paving of mosaics in the hail one looked up to ceilings glowing with the 
creations of the artist's pencil, and in every chamber paintings, statues, 
ormolu, tapestry, and all things else of the richest kind surrounded you. The 
other was a palace, too, with marble pillars, and carved work, but the stones 
were loosening, and the columns shifting, grass grew in the halls, and the 
roofs 
let in the rain, decay was there and desolation, and yet the palace was as 
noble 
in its architecture as the first. Thus when God dwells in a man, all his powers 
and faculties are bright with a sacred light, and joy and peace and beauty 
adorn 
his entire manhood; but if the Holy Spirit depart, the heart being empty and 
void becomes a ruin, everywhere decaying, and alas! too often haunted by the 
demons of vice and iniquity.  
 


## Life: the Power of an Earnest


The upper galleries at Versailles are filled with portraits, many of them 
extremely valuable and ancient. These are the likenesses of the greatest men of 
all lands and ages, drawn by the ablest artists. Yet most visitors wander 
through the rooms with little or no interest; in fact, after noticing one or 
two of the more prominent pictures, they hasten through the suite of chambers 
and descend to the other floors. Notice the change when the sight-seers come to 
fine paintings like those of Horace Vernet, where the men and women are not 
inactive portraits but are actively engaged. There the warrior who was passed 
by 
without notice upstairs, is seen hewing his way to glory over heaps of slain, 
or 
the statesman is observed delivering himself of weighty words before an 
assembly 
of princes and peers. Not the men but their actions engross attention. 
Portraits have no charm when scenes of stirring interest are set in rivalry 
with 
them. After all, then, let us be who or what we may, we must bestir ourselves 
or 
be mere nobodies, chips in the porridge, forgotten shells of the shore. If we 
would impress we must act. The dignity of standing still will never win the 
prize, we must run for it. Our influence over our times will arise mainly from 
our doing and suffering the will of God, not from our office or person. Life, 
life in earnest, life for God, this will tell on the age; but mere orderliness 
and propriety, inactive and passionless, will be utterly inoperative.  


## Life: to Be Viewed in Reference to Its End


The way is good, says Chrysostom, if it be to a feast, though through a dark 
and miry lane; if to an execution not good, though through the fairest street 
of 
the city. Non qua sed quo. Not the way but the end is to be mainly considered.  
 


## Life: Uncertain Tenure of


There is a talk of giving fixity of tenure in Ireland; can they find it in 
England, or for the matter of that, in all the world? No, we are all tenants, 
liable to be ejected without an hour's notice. How death must laugh at our 
leases and our bonds! Cobwebs are not more frail. A bubble has as sure a tenure 
as a man.  
'What boots your houses and your lands? 
In spite of close-drawn deed and fence, 
Like water, 'twixt your cheated hands, 
They slip into the graveyard's sands, 
And mock your ownership's pretence.'  
 


## Life: Uncertainty of


'It fareth with most men's lives, as with the sand in a deceptive hour-glass; 
look but upon it in outward appearance, and it seemeth far more than it is, 
because it riseth up upon the sides, whilst the sand is empty and hollow in the 
midst thereof:, so that when it sinks down in an instant, a quarter of an hour 
is gone in a moment. Thus many men are mistaken in their own account, reckoning 
upon threescore and ten years, the age of a man, because their bodies appear 
strong and lusty. Alas! their health may be hollow, there may be some inward 
infirmity and imperfection unknown to them, so that death may surprise them on 
a sudden, and they be cut down like the grass.'  
 


## Light: Detested by the Wicked


A sluttish housemaid when scolded for the untidiness of the chambers exclaimed, 
'I'm sure the rooms would be clean enough if it were not for the nasty sun 
which is always showing the dirty corners.' Thus do men revile the gospel 
because it reveals their own sin. Thus all agitations for reforms in Church and 
State are opposed, and all manner of mischief attributed to them as if they 
created the evils which they bring to light. The lover of the right courts 
anything which may manifest the wrong, but those who love evil have never a 
good 
word for those disturbing beams of truth which show up the filthy corners of 
their hearts and lives.  
 


## Little Things: Whereunto They May Grow


When the air balloon was first discovered, a matter-of- fact gentleman 
contemptuously asked Dr. Franklin what was the use of it. The doctor answered 
this question by asking another:: 'What is the use of a new-born infant? It may 
6ecome a man.' This anticipation of great things springing from small 
beginnings should induce us to put into practice those holy promptings which at 
certain seasons move our souls. What if we ourselves and our work should be 
little in Zion; cannot the Lord cause the grandest issues to proceed from 
insignificant beginnings? Who hath despised the day of small things?  
 


## Lives: Wrecked


Sailing down the Thames one occasionally sees a green flag in tatters, 
inscribed with the word WRECK, floating in the breeze over a piece of a mast, 
or 
the funnel of a steamer which is just visible above the water. Alas! how many 
lives might thus be marked, and how needful that they should be so labeled, 
lest 
they prove ruinous to others! The debauched, the self-righteous, the 
spendthrift, the miserly, the apostate, the drunken, how wisely might the flag 
be placed over them, for they each are a WRECK!  
 


## Longings: of the Soul Often Painful


Have you never seen a caged eagle with its breast or wing bleeding from blows 
received by dashing against the wire of its cage? The poor creature dreamed of 
the forest and the craggy rock, and, filled with aspirations for sublimest 
flight, it stretched its wings and flew upward, only to bring itself into sharp 
contact with its prison. Even thus the new-born nature, stirred in its inmost 
depths with longings suitable to its celestial origin, aspires after the joys 
of heaven, stretching all its wings to soar towards perfection; but alas! we 
who are in this body do groan, we find the flesh to be a prison, and so the 
more 
we long the more we pine, and pining we sigh and cry, and wound our hearts with 
insatiable desires and bleeding discontents. The pangs of strong desire for the 
presence of the Lord in glory, who among believers has not felt them? Who among 
us has not found our flight upward brought to a painful pause by the stern 
facts of flesh and blood, and earth and sin?  


## Love of God: Shed Abroad by the Holy Ghost


Frequently at the great Roman games, the emperors, in order to gratify the 
citizens of Rome, would cause sweet perfumes to be rained down upon them 
through the awning which covered the amphitheatre. Behold the vases, the huge 
vessels of perfume! Yes, but there is nought here to delight you so long as the 
jars are sealed; but let the vases be opened, and the vessels be poured out, 
and 
let the drops of perfumed rain begin to descend, and every one is refreshed and 
gratified thereby. Such is the love of God. There is a richness and a fulness 
in it, but it is not perceived till the Spirit of God pours it out like the 
rain 
of fragrance over the heads and hearts of all the living children of God. See, 
then, the need of having the love of God shed abroad in the heart by the Holy 
Ghost!  
 


## Lust


Our lusts are cords. Fiery trials are sent to burn and consume them. Who fears 
the flame which will bring him liberty from bonds intolerable?  
 


## Man (the Good): Beneficial Influence of the Good Man


In a hot summer's-day, some years ago, I was sailing with a friend in a tiny 
boat, on a miniature lake, enclosed like a cup within a circle of steep, bare 
Scottish hills. On the shoulder of the brown sun-burnt mountain, and full in 
sight, was a well with a crystal stream trickling over its lip, and making its 
way down towards the lake. Around the well's mouth and along the course of the 
rivulet, a belt of green stood out in strong contrast with the iron surface of 
the rocks all around. We soon agreed as to what should be made of it. There it 
was, a legend clearly printed by the finger of God on the side of these silent 
hills, teaching the passer-by how needful a good man is, and how useful he may 
be in a desert world.: W. Arnot.  
 


## Man (the Good): Beneficial Influence of


Alexander Von Humboldt thus writes of the cow-tree:: 'On the barren flank of a 
rock grows a tree with coriaceous and dry leaves. Its large woody roots can 
scarcely penetrate into the stone. For several months of the year not a single 
shower moistens its foliage. Its branches appear dead and dried; but when the 
trunk is pierced there flows from it a sweet and nourishing milk. It is at the 
rising of the sun that this vegetable fountain is most abundant. The negroes 
and natives are then seen hastening from all quarters, furnished with large 
bowls to receive the milk, which grows yellow, and thickens at its surface. 
Some 
empty their bowls under the tree itself, others carry the juice borne to their 
children.'  
May not the earnest Christian ministering good on all sides be imaged in this 
marvelous tree? He is in his own esteem full often a withered and dead tree, 
but there is within him a living sap, which wells up with blessing t all 
around. 
His surroundings are all against him, the soil in which he grows is hostile to 
grace, yet he not only lives on, but luxuriates. He derives nothing from earth, 
his fountain is from above, but he enriches the sons of earth with untold 
blessings, and though they often wound him they experimentally know his value. 
To him full many of the poor and needy look up as to a friend in need, he is 
full of the milk of human kindness; where he cannot give in golden coin he 
distributes comfort in sympathy and words of cheer.  
 


## Man: a Stain on the Universe


Ruskin says:: 'The Savoyard's cottage, standing in the midst of an 
inconceivable, inexpressible beauty, set on some sloping bank of golden sward, 
with clear fountains flowing beside it, and wild flowers, and noble trees, and 
goodly rocks, gathered round into a perfection as of Paradise, is itself a dark 
and plague-like stain in the midst of the gentle landscape. Within a certain 
distance of its threshold the ground is foul and cattle-trampled; its timbers 
are black with smoke, its garden choked with weeds and nameless refuse, its 
chambers empty and joyless, the light and wind gleaming and filtering through 
the crannies of their stones.'  
Alas! too fit an illustration of unregenerate manhood in the midst of divine 
mercies, surrounded with displays of boundless goodness.  
'Every prospect pleases, 
And only man is vile.'  
 


## Man: Fallen


We saw at Hanover the unfinished palace of the deposed monarch: we were shown 
his state and private carriages and his stables of cream-coloured horses. A 
saddening sight to see all the emblems of sovereignty and no king; the insignia 
of royalty and the monarch for ever exiled. How like to human nature, which has 
so much about it prepared for the service of the King of kings, so much of 
faculty for heavenly occupation, but the king has departed and the house is 
left desolate, and all the furnishing thereof perverted to alien uses. Thought, 
imagination, judgment, memory, all fit to be yoked to celestial chariots, 
become the very hacks of the devil, and the body once a palace now a haunt of 
thieves. Alas, alas! poor manhood!  


## Man: Natural State of


A musical amateur of eminence, who had often observed Mr. Cadogan's inattention 
to his performances, said to him one day, 'Come, I am determined to make you 
feel the power of music, pay particular attention to this piece.' It was 
played.  'Well, what do you say now?' 'Just what I said before.' 'What! can you 
hear this and not be charmed? I am surprised at your insensibility! Where are 
your ears?' 'Bear with me, my lord,' replied Mr. Cadogan, 'since I too have had 
my surprise; I have from the pulpit set before you the most striking and 
affecting truths; I have found notes that might have awaked the dead; I have 
said, Surely he will feel now; but you never seemed charmed with my music, 
though infinitely more interesting than yours. I too might have said: Where are 
his ears?'
Man, until sovereign grace opens his ears, is deaf to the heavenly harmonies of 
the love of God in Christ Jesus, although these are the ravishment of angels 
and the wonder of eternity.  
 


## Man: Perversion of His Faculties


According to the fable, the tail of the snake obtained precedence of the head 
and led the way in the creature's journeying. Being altogether blind the new 
guide dashed against a stone at one moment, and the next came violently against 
a tree, and at last drowned both itself and the head in the river of death. 
Here may be seen the unhappy condition of men in whom their baser nature is 
dominant, the animal controlling the intellectual. They invert the order of 
nature, they rebel against common sense; their course. cannot but be unwise and 
dangerous, and their end must be fatal. God made man upright, and placed his 
thoughtful faculties aloft in the place of sovereignty, but man in his folly 
permits the appetites which he holds in common with the brute creation to reign 
supreme, while the mind, which ought to rule, is degraded to meanest servitude. 
 
 


## Means of Grace: Their Disuse a Sad Loss


My Aeolian harp is not sounding and yet a fine fresh wind is blowing in at the 
window. Why hear I not its soft mystic strains? I remember, it was put away in 
the lumber room and some of its strings are broken. There is a gracious revival 
in the church, and believers are greatly refreshed by the visitations of God's 
Spirit, but I am in a sadly worldly unbelieving condition. May it not be 
because I neglect private prayer, and have not been regular at the 
prayer-meeting; my family concerns and business cares have kept my heart in the 
lumber room, and my soul has lost her first love? Yes, these are the reasons. 
Lord, tune my heart, and I will again seek the places where the heavenly wind 
of 
thy Spirit blows graciously and refreshingly. How can I bear to be silent when 
thy daily mercies are all around me singing of thy love?  
 


## Meditation: to Be Practiced


Those who would be in health do not sit still in their houses to breathe such 
air as may come to them, but they walk abroad and seek out rural and elevated 
spots that they may inhale the invigorating breezes; and thus those godly souls 
who would be in a vigorous spiritual state, do not merely think upon such holy 
doctrines as may come into their minds in the ordinary course of thought, but 
they give time to meditation, they walk abroad in the fields of truth, and 
endeavor to climb the heights of gospel promises. It is said that Enoch walked 
with God: here is not an idle but an active communion. The road to bodily 
health is said to be a footpath, and the way to spiritual health is to exercise 
one's self in holy contemplation.  
 


## Mercies (Temporal): an Argument


If the Lord has enriched you in temporals, though you have not feared him, have 
you not every reason to expect that he will do as well for you in spirituals, 
if you ask him to do so? You call at a friend's house on horseback; he takes 
your horse into the stable, and is remarkably attentive to it; the creature is 
well groomed, well housed, well fed; you are not at all afraid that you will be 
shut out, there is surely a warm place in the parlour for the rider, where the 
horse is so well accommodated in the stable. Now, your body, which we may liken 
to the horse, has enjoyed temporal prosperity in abundance, and surely the Lord 
will take care of your soul if you seek his face! Let your prayer be,' My God, 
my Father, be my guide. Since thou hast dealt so well with me in these external 
matters, give me true riches, give me to love thy Son and trust in him, and so 
be henceforth thy child.'  
 


## Mercy: Abuse of


A certain member of that parliament wherein a statute for the relief of the 
poor was passed, was an ardent promoter of that Act. He asked his steward when 
he returned to the country, what the people said of that statute. The steward 
answered, that he heard a labouring man say, that whereas formerly he worked 
six days in the week, now he would work but four; which abuse of that good 
provision so affected the pious statesman that he could not refrain from 
weeping. Lord, thou hast made many provisions in thy Word for my support and 
comfort, and hast promised in my necessities thy supply and protection; but let 
not my presumption of help from thee cause my neglect of any of those means for 
my spiritual and temporal preservation which thou hast enjoined.  
 


## Mercy: Continual


A benevolent person gave Mr. Rowland Hill a hundred pounds to dispense to a 
poor minister, and thinking it was too much to send him all at once, Mr. Hill 
forwarded five pounds in a letter, with simply these words within the envelope, 
'More to follow.' In a few days' time, the good man received another letter by 
the post: and letters by the post were rarities in those days; this second 
messenger contained another five pounds, with the same motto, 'And more to 
follow.' A day or two after came a third and a fourth, and still the same 
promise, 'And more to follow.' Till the whole sum had been received the 
astonished minister was made familiar with the cheering words, 'And more to 
follow.'  
Every blessing that comes from God is sent with the selfsame message, 'And more 
to follow.' 'I forgive you your sins, but there's more to follow.' 'I justify 
you in the righteousness of Christ, but there's more to follow.' 'I adopt you 
into my family, but there's more to follow.' 'I educate you for heaven, but 
there's more to follow.' 'I give you grace upon grace, but there's more to 
follow.' 'I have helped you even to old age, but there's still more to follow.' 
'I will uphold you in the hour of death, and as you are passing into the world 
of spirits, my mercy shall still continue with you, and when you land in the 
world to come there shall still be MORE TO FOLLOW.'  
 


## Mercy: Dissolves the Heart


You may have heard of some persons condemned to execution, who at the scaffold 
have been so obdurate and still-necked that not a cry or a tear came from them; 
yet, just as they have been going to lay their necks upon the block, when a 
pardon has come, and they were at once discharged from guilt, imprisonment, and 
death, they that could not weep a tear before, no sooner saw the pardon sealed, 
and themselves acquitted, than they dissolved into tears of joy, thankfulness, 
and surprise. So it is with believers. The more they see Christ in the pardon 
of sin, and the love of God in Christ to receive and embrace them, the more 
they melt.: Tobias Crisp.  
 


## Mercy: Excellence of

I remember well being taken one day to see a gorgeous palace at Venice, where 
every piece of furniture was made with most exquisite taste, and of the richest 
material, where statues and pictures of enormous price abounded on all hands, 
and the floor of each room was paved with mosaics of marvelous art, and 
extraordinary value. As I was shown from room to room, and allowed to roam amid 
the treasures by its courteous owner, I felt a considerable timidity, I was 
afraid to sit anywhere, nor did I hardly dare to put down my foot, or rest my 
hand to lean. Everything seemed to be too good for ordinary mortals like 
myself; but when one is introduced into the gorgeous palace of infinite 
goodness, costlier and fairer far, one gazes wonderingly with reverential awe 
at 
the matchless vision. 'How excellent is thy lovingkindness, O God!' 'I am not 
worthy of the least of all thy benefits. Oh! the depths of the love and 
goodness 
of the Lord.' 
 


## Mercy: Its Effect on the Soul


A man convicted of high treason and condemned to die is not only pardoned, but 
taken into the favour of his sovereign. He is riding in the royal carriage, and 
on the road he sees some of his fellow traitors pinioned and manacled, led 
forth in the midst of officers to die for the offence in which he had as deep a 
hand as they. What think you, will he not entreat the gracious monarch to 
extend 
his clemency to his fellow rebels? Will not the tears stand in his eyes as he 
admires the difference which his sovereign's free mercy has made? Will he not 
be moved with emotions impossible to describe, of mingled joy and grief; pity 
and gratitude, wonder and compassion? Christian, see your likeness here drawn 
to 
the life, you must surely feel ready to fall down on your knees, and cry,' 
Lord, 
why dost thou reveal thy mercy to me and not to these? Save them also, O Lord, 
for thy name's sake.'  
 


## Mercy: Seen in Our Lives


What a rugged, precipitous, ungainly pass is that Col D'Obbia! It was shrewd 
common sense, and true humanity which suggested the erection of that poor 
little hospice at the summit. Never was a shelter more opportune, a refuge more 
welcome. One could not have expected to find a retreat in so desolate a region, 
but there it was, and we were received into it with cordiality. The great Lord 
of pilgrims has taken care that in the hardest parts of our road to the 
Celestial City there should be blessed resting places, where beneath the shade 
of promises, weary ones may repose within the shelter of love. God's hospice 
may be confidently looked for whenever the way is more than ordinarily 
difficult.  
 


## Merits


A ship on her way to Australia met with a very terrible storm, and sprung a 
leak. As evils seldom come alone, a little while after another tempest assailed 
her. There happened to be a gentleman on board, of the most nervous 
temperament, whose garrulous tongue and important air were calculated to alarm 
all the passengers. When the storm came on, the captain, who knew what mischief 
may be done by a suspicious and talkative individual, managed to get near him 
with a view to rendering him quiet. The gentlemen addressing the captain, said 
in a tone of alarm, 'What an awful storm; I am afraid we shall go to the 
bottom, 
for I hear the leak is very bad.' 'Well,' said the captain, 'as you seem to 
know 
it, and perhaps the others do not, you had better not mention it to any one, 
lest you should frighten the passengers or dispirit my men. Perhaps as it is a 
very bad case, you would lend us your valuable help, and then we may possibly 
get through it. Would you have the goodness to stand here and hold hard on this 
rope; pray do not leave it, but pull as hard as ever you can till I tell you to 
let it go.' So our friend clenched his teeth, and put his feet firmly down, and 
kept on holding this rope with all his might, till he earnestly wished for a 
substitute. The storm abated; the ship was safe, and our friend was released 
from his rope-holding. He expected a deputation would bring him the thanks of 
all the passengers, but they were evidently unconscious of his merits; for it 
is too often the case that we forget our greatest benefactors. Even the captain 
did not seem very grateful; so our hero ventured, in a roundabout style to 
hint, that such valuable services as his, having saved the vessel, ought to be 
rewarded at least with some few words of acknowledgment; when he was shocked to 
hear the captain say, 'What, sir, do you think you saved the vessel? Why, I 
gave you that rope to hold to keep you engaged, that you might not be in such a 
feverish state of alarm.'  
The self-righteous may here see how much men contribute to their own salvation 
apart from Christ. They think they can certainly save themselves, and there 
they stand holding the rope with their clenched teeth and their feet tightly 
fixed, while they are really doing no more than our officious friend, who was 
thus befooled. If ever you get to heaven, you will find that everything you did 
towards your own salvation, apart from the Lord Jesus, was about as useful as 
holding the rope; that in fact, the safety of the soul lies somewhere else, and 
not in you; and that what is wanted with you is just to get out of the way, and 
let Christ come in and magnify his grace.  
 


## Minister


The sharp shrill cry of 'Acqua! Acqua!' constantly pierces the ear of the 
wanderer in Venice and other towns of sultry Italy. There is the man who thus 
invites your attention. Look at him. On his back he bears a burden of water, 
and in his hand a rack of bottles containing essences to flavour the draught if 
needed, and glasses to hold the cooling liquid. In the streets of London he 
would find but little patronage, but where fountains are few and the days are 
hot as an oven, he earns a livelihood and supplies a public need. The present 
specimen of water-dealers is a poor old man bent sideways, by the weight of his 
daily burden. He is worn out in all but his voice, which is truly startling in 
its sharpness and distinctness. At our call he stops immediately, glad to drop 
his burden on the ground, and smiling in prospect of a customer. He washes out 
a glass for us, fills it with sparkling water, offers us the tincture which we 
abhor, puts it back into the rack again when we shake our head, receives 
half-a-dozen soldi with manifest gratitude, and trudges away across the square, 
crying still, 'Acqua! Acqua!' That cry, shrill as it is, has sounded sweetly in 
the ears of many a thirsty soul, and will for ages yet to come, if throats and 
thirst survive so long. How forcibly it calls to our mind the Saviour's 
favourite imagery, in which he compares the grace which he bestows on all who 
diligently seek it, to 'living water;' and how much that old man is like the 
faithful preacher of the word, who, having filled his vessel at the well, wears 
himself out by continually bearing the burden of the Lord, and crying, 'Water! 
water!' amid crowds of sinners, who must drink or die. Instead of the poor 
Italian water-bearer, we see before us the man of God, whose voice is heard in 
the chief places of concourse, proclaiming the divine invitation, 'Ho, every 
one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters!' until he grows grey in the service, 
anÃ§l men say, 'Surely those aged limbs have need of rest;' yet rest he courts 
not, but pursues his task of mercy; never laying down his charge till he lays 
down his body, and never ceasing to work until he ceases to live.  
At the door of Saint Mark's Cathedral, we bought a glass of what should have 
been the pure element, but when we began to drink, a pungent flavour of 
something which had previously been in the cup, made us leave the rest of our 
purchase, thirsty though we were. The water was good enough, but the vessel 
which held it imparted an evil taste to it; the like has often happened in the 
ministry, the gospel preached has been true and divine, but the unhallowed 
savor of an inconsistent life, or a bitter disposition, has marred the 
sweetness 
of the Word. May all of us by whom the Lord hands out the water of life, see 
that we are clean and pure in conversation, vessels fit for the Master's use. 
Men who are very thirsty will drink out of any cup, however dirty; but no 
conceivable advantage can arise from filth, and hundreds will turn away from 
the 
water because of it, and thus a very faulty ministry may be useful because of 
the truth contained in it, but its sinfulness can do no good, and may serve as 
an excuse to the ungodly for refusing the gospel of Christ.  
In the square of the Doge's palace are two wells, from which the sellers of 
water obtain their stock-in-trade, but we can hardly compare either of them 
with the overflowing spring from which the preacher of righteousness draws his 
supplies. One of the wells is filled artificially and is not much used for 
drinking, since the coldness and freshness of water springing naturally from 
earth's deep fountains is lacking. It is to be feared that many preachers 
depend for their matter upon theological systems, books, and mere learning, and 
hence their teaching is devoid of the living power and refreshing influence 
which is found in communion with 'the spring of all our joys.' The other well 
yields most delicious water, but its flow is scanty. In the morning it is full, 
but a crowd of eager persons drain it to the bottom, and during the day as it 
rises by driblets, every drop is contended for and borne away, long before 
there 
is enough below to fill a bucket. In its excellence, continuance and 
naturalness, this well might be a fair picture of the grace of our Lord Jesus, 
but it fails to set him forth from its poverty of supply, He has a redundance, 
an overflow, an infinite fulness, and there is no possibility-of his being 
exhausted by the draughts made upon him, even though ten thousand times ten 
thousand should come with a thirst as deep as the abyss. We could not help 
saying, 'Spring up, 0 well,' as we looked over the margin covered with copper, 
into which strings and ropes: continually used by the waiting many: had worn 
deep channels. Very little of the coveted liquid was brought up each time, but 
the people were patient, and their tin vessels went up and down as fast as 
there 
was a cupful to be had. 0 that men were half as diligent in securing the 
precious gifts of the Spirit, which are priceless beyond compare! Alas! how few 
have David's thirst for the well of Bethlehem. The cans sent down had very 
broad 
sides, so that they dropped down flat upon the bottom of the well, and were 
drawn up less than half full; larger vessels would have been useless, and so, 
indeed, would small ones if they had not been made to lie quite down upon their 
sides, along what we must call the floor of the well, and had they have been 
erect they would not have received a drop. Humility is always a profitable 
grace; pride is always as useless as it is foolish. Only by bowing our minds to 
the utmost before the Lord, can we expect to receive his mercy, for he promises 
grace unto the humble in that same verse which foretells his resistance of the 
proud. If there be grace anywhere, contrite hearts will get it. The lower we 
can 
fall, the sooner will the springing water of grace reach us, and the more 
completely shall we be filled with it.  
It would be a great misfortune for those who buy their water in the streets, if 
the itinerant vendors should begin to fill their casks and bottles from muddy 
streams. At Botzen, in the Tyrol, we saw many fountains running with a liquid 
of a very brown colour, and a seller of such stuff might cry 'Acqua!' very long 
and very loudly before we should partake of his dainties. Sundry divines in our 
age have become weary of the old-fashioned well of which our fathers drank, and 
would fain have us go to their Abana and Pharpar, but we are still firm in the 
belief that the water from the rock has no rival, and we shall not, we hope, 
forsake it for any other. May the Lord send to our happy land more simple 
gospel, more Christ-exalting doctrine, more free-grace teaching, more distinct 
testimony to atoning blood and eternal love. In most of the Swiss villages 
there are streaming fountains by the dozen, and the pure liquid is to be had at 
every corner; may we yet see the Word of God as abundantly distributed in every 
town, village, and hamlet in England. Meanwhile, having recorded the prayer, we 
resolve, by divine grace, to cry more loudly than ever, 'Acqua! Acqua!'  


## Minister (2)


However learned, godly, and eloquent a minister may be, he is nothing without 
the Holy Spirit. The bell in the steeple may be well hung, fairly fashioned, 
and of soundest metal, but it is dumb until the ringer makes it speak; and in 
like manner the preacher has no voice of quickening for the dead in sin, or of 
comfort for living saints until the divine Spirit gives him a gracious pull, 
and bids him speak with power. Hence the need of prayer from both preacher and 
hearers.  
 


## Minister: Need of Personal Tenderness


Speaking of the temper requisite to the right discharge of ministerial duty, 
Payson said, 'I never was fit to say a word to a sinner, except when I had a 
broken heart myself; when I was subdued and melted into penitency, and felt as 
though I had just received pardon to my own soul, and when my heart was full of 
tenderness and pity. No anger, no anger.'  
 


## Minister: Self-Dissatisfaction of


'Swift of foot was Hiawatha, 
He could shoot an arrow from him, 
And run forward with such fleetness,  That the arrow fell behind him!'
The fable is even less than truth with the fervent preacher: he darts arrows of 
fire in flaming speech, but his eagerness to win souls far outruns his words. 
He projects himself far beyond his language. His heart outstrips his utterance. 
He embraces souls in his love, while his words as yet are but on the wing. 
Often and often will he weep when his sermon is over, because his words 'fell 
behind him;' yet has he cause for joy, that he should have received so divine a 
spirit from his Master's hand: his very dissatisfaction proves his zeal.  


## Minister: Should Be a Nursing Father


In a church in Verona stands, or rather sits, a wooden image of St. Zeno, an 
ancient bishop, with knees so ludicrously short that there is no lap on which a 
babe could be dandled. He was not the first nor the last ecclesiastic who has 
been utterly incapable of being a nursing father to the church. It were well if 
all ministers had a heavenly instinct for the nourishing and bringing up of the 
Lord's little ones. Is there not much lack in this?  
 


## Ministry: Best Men Needed for It


'Amongst the Jesuits they have a rule, that they who are unapt for greater 
studies, shall study cases of conscience.' Is this to be adopted among 
Protestants, and when a man is too brainless to succeed in any common calling, 
is he therefore to argue that he is called to the ministry? This mischievous 
notion fills pulpits, but it empties pews. The fact is, the very pick of our 
Christian men are wanted for a work  
'Which well might fill an angel's heart, 
Did fill a Saviour's hands.'  
 


## Mistakes: Our Aptness to Make


We were riding along in the afternoon of a lovely but blazing day from Varallo 
to Riva, and to quench our thirst on the road we carried with us some bottles 
of an excellent lemonade. The empty bottles were of no use to us, and one of 
them was given to a friend on the box seat of the carriage to throw away. He 
happened to be the essence of gentleness and liberality, and seeing two very 
poor peasant women trudging along with huge empty baskets strapped on their 
backs, he thought it would delight them if he dropped the bottle into one of 
their receptacles; a bottle being far more a godsend there than in England. 
Alas, for our friend's happiness during the whole of the next twenty-four 
hours! 
The motion of the carriage made him miss his aim, and the bottle fell on the 
head of the woman instead of into her basket. There was a shrill cry, and a 
good 
deal of blood and speedy faintness. Of course, we were all in an instant 
binding 
up the wound with silver, and our friend we feel sure used golden ointment, so 
that the poor old creature would have cheerfully had her head broken ten times 
to receive such a sum as she obtained by way of solatium; but still the 
accident 
saddened us all, and especially our dear tended-hearted friend from whose hand 
the missile was dropped. How often has his case been. ours! We meant to cheer a 
troubled conscience and instead thereof we wounded it yet more. We intended 
nothing but love, hut our words gave pain; we had miscalculated, and missed our 
aim. This has both astonished us and caused us the deepest regret. Yet such a 
blunder has made us the more careful, and has humbled us under a sense of our 
readiness to err, and moreover it has led us to be still more liberal in the 
use 
of that precious treasure of the gospel, which easily recompenses for all our 
blundering. Loving reader, be careful with your kindnesses, but be not too much 
depressed should they fail to comfort. The Lord knows your intentions.  
 


## Money-Making: No Time for


A gentlemen of Boston (U. S.), an intimate friend of Professor Agassiz, once 
expressed his wonder that a man of such abilities as he (Agassiz) possessed 
should remain contented with such a moderate income. 'I have enough,' was 
Agassiz's reply. 'I have not time to make money. Life is not sufficiently long 
to enable a man to get rich, and do his duty to his fellow men at the same 
time.' Christian, have you time to serve your God and yet to give your whole 
soul to gaining wealth? The question is left for conscience to answer.  
 


## Money-Making: Nothing but Play


Mr. Ruskin, in his lecture on Work,* says:: 'Whatever we do to please 
ourselves, and only for the sake of the pleasure, not for an ultimate object, 
is 
'play,' the 'pleasing thing,' not the useful thing. . . . The first of all 
English games is making money. That is an all-absorbing game; and we knock each 
other down oftener in playing at that than at foot-ball, or any other rougher 
sport; and it is absolutely without purpose; no one who engages heartily in 
that 
game ever knows why. Ask a great money-maker what he wants to do with his 
money: 
he never knows. He doesn't make it to do anything with it. He gets it only that 
he may get it. 'What will you make of what you have got?' you ask. 'Well, I'll 
get more,' he says. Just as at cricket, you get more runs. There's no use in 
the runs, but to get more of them than other people is the game. And there's no 
use in the money, but to have more of it than other people is the game. So all 
that great foul city of London there: rattling, growling, smoking, stinking: a 
ghastly heap of fermenting brickwork, pouring out poison at every pore: you 
fancy it is a city of work? Not a street of it! It is a great city of play; 
very nasty play, and very hard play,. but still play. It is only Lord's Cricket 
Ground without the turf: a huge billiard-table without the cloth, and with 
pockets as deep as the bottomless pit, but mainly a billiard table after all.'  
* In 'The Crown of Wild Olive, Three Lectures on Work, Traffic, and War.' By 
John Ruskin, M.A., 1866.
 


## Moralist


The dahlia would surely be a very empress among flowers if it had but perfume 
equal to its beauty; even the rose might need to look to her sovereignty. 
Florists have tried all their arts to scent this lovely child of autumn but in 
vain, no fragrance can be developed or produced; God has denied the boon, and 
human skill cannot impart it. The reflecting mind will be reminded of those 
admirable characters which are occasionally met with, in which everything of 
good repute and comely aspect may be seen, but true religion, that sweet 
ethereal perfume of grace, is wanting; if they had but love to God, what lovely 
beings they would be, the best of the saints would not excel them, and yet that 
fragrant grace they do not seek, and after every effort we may make for their 
conversion, they remain content without the one thing which is needful for 
their perfection. O that the Lord would impart to them the mystic sweetness of 
his grace by the Holy Spirit!  
 


## Motives


There are overshot water-wheels and undershot. In the one case the motive power 
falls from above, in the other the water turns the wheel from below; the first 
is the more powerful. Men, like wheels, are turned by forces from various 
sources, and too many move by the undercurrent: mercenary desires and selfish 
aims drive them; but the good man's driving force falls from above; let him 
endeavor to prove to all men that this is the most mighty force in existence.  
 


## Motives (2)


Standing near the remarkable spring at Ewell, in Surrey, and watching the 
uprising of the waters, one sees at the bottom of the pool innumerable circles 
with smaller circles within them, from which extremely fine sand is continually 
being upheaved by the force of the rising water. Tiny geysers upheave their 
little founts, and from a myriad openings bubble up with the clear crystal. The 
perpetual motion of the water, and the leaping of the sand are most 
interesting. It is not like the spring-head in the field, where the cooling 
liquid pours forth perpetually from a spout, all unseen, till it plunges into 
its channel; nor like the river-head where the stream weeps from a mass of 
mossy 
rock; but here are the fountains of earth's hidden deeps all unveiled and laid 
bare, the very veins of nature opened to the public gaze. How would it amaze us 
if we could in this fashion peer into the springs of human character and see 
whence words and actions flow! What man would wish to have his designs and aims 
exposed to every onlooker.? But why this aversion to being known and read of 
all 
men? The Christian's motives and springs of action should be so honest and pure 
that he might safely defy inspection. He who has nothing to be ashamed of has 
nothing to conceal. Sincerity can afford, like our first, parents in Paradise, 
to be naked and not ashamed.  
If other men cannot read our motives, we ought at least to examine them 
carefully for ourselves. Day by day with extreme rigour must we search into our 
hearts. Motive is vital to the goodness of an action. He who should give his 
body to be burned might yet lose his soul if his ruling passion were obstinacy, 
and not desire for God's glory. Self may be sought under many disguises, and 
the man may be utterly unaware that thus he is losing all acceptance with God. 
We must not impute ill motives to others, but we must be equally clear of 
another more fascinating habit, namely, that of imputing good motives to 
ourselves. Severity in estimating our own personal character very seldom 
becomes 
excessive; our partiality is usually more or less blinding to our judgment. We 
will not suspect ourselves if we can help it; evidence must be very powerful 
before it can convince us of being governed by sordid aims. The stream of 
generosity does not always spring from gratitude to God. Zeal is not at all 
times the offspring of deep-seated faith. Even devotional habits may be 
fostered 
by other than holy affections. The highest wisdom suggests that we spend much 
patient and impartial consideration upon a matter so fundamental as the heart's 
intent in the actions which it directs. 'If thine eye be single, thine whole 
body shall be full of light.' Dear reader, stand by thine inner springs and 
watch, and make faithful notes of what thou seest, lest thou be deceived.  


## Nature: Need of Renewal


A vicious horse is none the better tempered because the kicking straps prevent 
his dashing the carriage to atoms; and so a man is none the better really 
because the restraints of custom and providence may prevent his following that 
course of life which he would prefer. Poor fallen human nature behind the bars 
of laws, and in the cage of fear of punishment, is none the less a sad 
creature; should its Master unlock the door we should soon see what it would be 
and do. A young leopard which had been domesticated, and treated as a pet, 
licked its master's hand while he slept, and it so happened that it drew blood 
from a recent wound; the first taste of blood transformed the gentle creature 
into a raging wild beast; yet it wrought no real change, it only awakened the 
natural ferocity which had always been there. A change of nature is required 
for 
our salvation: mere restraints are of small value.  
 


## Natures: the Two in a Christian


A Christian lives in two worlds at one and the same time:the world of flesh 
and the world of spirit. It is possible to do both. There are certain dangerous 
gases, which from their weight fall to the lower part of the place where they 
are, making it destructive for a dog to enter, but safe for a man who holds his 
head erect. A Christian, as living in the world of flesh, is constantly passing 
through these. Let him keep his head erect in the spiritual world, and he is 
safe. He does this so long as the Son of God is the fountain whence he draws 
his inspiration, his motives, encouragement, and strength.: George Philpot  
 


## Novelty: Influence of


Yes, the people gathered in crowds around the statue, and looked at it again 
and again. It was not the finest work of art in the city, nor the most 
intrinsically attractive. Why, then, did the citizens of Verona stand in such 
clusters around the effigy of Dante on that summer's evening? Do you guess the 
reason? It was a fête in honor of the poet? No, you are mistaken; it was but an 
ordinary evening, and there was nothing peculiar in the date or the events of 
the day. You shall not be kept in suspense, the reason was very simple, the 
statue was new, it had, in fact, only been unveiled the day before. Every one 
passes Dante now, having other things to think of; the citizens are well used 
to 
his solemn visage, and scarcely care that he stands among them. Is not this the 
way of men? I am sure it is their way with us ministers. New brooms sweep 
clean. 
What crowds follow a new man! how they tread upon one another to hear him, not 
because he is so very wise or eloquent, much less because he is eminently holy, 
but he is a new man, and curiosity must gratify itself! In a few short months, 
the idol of the hour is stale, flat, and unprofitable; he is a mediocrity; 
there 
are scores as good as he; indeed, another new man, at the end of the town, is 
far better. Away go the wonder-hunters! Folly brought them, folly removes them: 
babies must have new toys.  
 


## Obedience


'Sir,' said the Duke of Wellington to an officer of engineers, who urged the 
impossibility of executing the directions he had received, 'I did not ask your 
opinion, I gave you my orders, and I expect them to be obeyed.' Such should be 
the obedience of every follower of Jesus. The words which he has spoken are our 
law, not our judgments or fancies. Even if death were in the way it is: 'Not 
ours to reason why: Ours, but to dare and die;' and, at our Master's bidding, 
advance through flood or flame.  


## Obeying God: with Delight


'I wish I could mind God as my little dog minds me,' said a little boy, looking 
thoughtfully on his shaggy friend; 'he always looks so pleased to mind, and I 
don't.' What a painful truth did this child speak! Shall the poor little dog 
thus readily obey his master, and we rebel against God, who is our Creator, our 
Preserver, our Father, our Savior, and the bountiful Giver of everything we 
love?: Christian Treasury.  
 


## Omniscience


A plate of sweet cakes was brought in and placed upon the table. Two children 
played upon the hearth rug before the fire. 'Oh, I want one of these cakes!' 
cried the little boy, jumping up as soon as his mother went out, and going on 
tiptoe towards the table. 'No, no,' said his sister, pulling him back; 'no, no; 
you must not touch.' 'Mother won't know it; she did not count them,' he cried, 
shaking her off, and stretching out his hand. 'If she didn't, perhaps God 
counted,' answered the other. The little boy's hand was stayed. Yes, children, 
be sure that God counts I: children's Missionary Recorder 1852.  
 


## Order in Duty: Its Beauty


Linnus, the great Swedish botanist, observing the beautiful order which reigns 
among flowers, proposed the use of a floral clock, to be composed of plants 
which open and close their blossoms at particular hours; as for instance the 
dandelion which opens its petals at six in the morning, the hawkweed at seven, 
the succory at eight, the celandine at nine, and so on; the closing of the 
flowers being marked with an equal regularity so as to indicate the progress of 
the afternoon and the evening.  
'Thus has each hour its own rich hue, 
And its graceful cup or bell, 
In whose coloured vase may sleep the dew, 
Like a pearl in an ocean shell.'  Would it not be a lovely thing if thus with 
flowers of grace and blossoms of virtue we bedecked every passing hour; 
fulfilling all the duties of each season and honoring him who maketh the 
outgoings of the morning and the evening to rejoice! Thus with undeviating 
regularity to obey the influence of the Sun of Righteousness, and give each 
following moment its due, were to begin the life of heaven beneath the stars. 
 


## Order: of Gracious Operations


'A discussion arose between some members of a Bible class, in reference to the 
first Christian exercise of the converted soul. One contended that it was 
penitence or sorrow; another that it was fear, another love, another hope, 
another faith, for how could one fear or repent without belief? Elder G-, 
overhearing the discussion, relieved the minds of the disputants with this 
remark:: 'Can you tell which spoke of the wheel moves first? You may be looking 
at one spoke, and think that it moves first, but they all start together. Thus, 
when the Spirit of God operates upon the human heart, all the graces begin to 
affect the penitent soul, though the individual may be more conscious of one 
than another.'  
 


## Peace of Pardon: Not a Mere Forgetfulness


I have spilled the ink over a bill and so have blotted it till it can hardly be 
read, but this is quite another thing from having the debt blotted out, for 
that cannot be till payment is made. So a man may blot his sins from his 
memory, 
and quiet his mind with false hopes, but the peace which this will bring him is 
widely different from that which arises from God's forgiveness of sin through 
the satisfaction which Jesus made in his atonement. Our blotting is one thing, 
God's blotting out is something far higher.  
 


## Peace: False


Your peace, sinner, is that terribly prophetic calm which the traveler 
occasionally perceives upon the higher Alps. Everything is still. The birds 
suspend their notes, fly low, and cower down with fear. The hum of bees among 
the flowers is hushed. A horrible stillness rules the hour, as if death had 
silenced all things by stretching over them his awful scepter. Perceive ye not 
what is surely at hand? The tempest is preparing; the lightning will soon cast 
abroad its flames of fire. Earth will rock with thunder-blasts; granite peaks 
will be dissolved; all nature will tremble beneath the fury of the storm. Yours 
is that solemn calm to-day, sinner. Rejoice not in it, for the hurricane of 
wrath is coming, the whirlwind and the tribulation which shall sweep you away 
and utterly destroy you.  
 


## Peace: of a Believer


The believer's peace is like a river for confirmance. Look at it, rising as a 
little brook among the mosses of the lone green hill; by-and-by it leaps as a 
rugged cataract; anon it flows along that fair valley where the red deer 
wanders, and the child loves to play. With bum of pleasant music the brook 
turns the village mill. Hearken to its changeful tune as it ripples over its 
pebbly bed, or leaps adown the wheel, or sports in eddies where the trees bend 
down their branches to kiss the current. Anon the streamlet has become a river, 
and bears upon its flood full many a craft. Then its bosom swells, bridges with 
noble arches span it, and, grown vaster still, it becomes an estuary, broad 
enough to be an arm of old Father Ocean, pouring its water-floods into the 
mighty main. The river abides the lapse of ages, it is no evanescent morning 
cloud, or transient rain-flood, but in all its stages it is permanent.  
'Men may come, and men may go, 
But I flow on for ever.'  
Evermore, throughout all generations, the river speedeth to its destined place. 
Such is the peace of the Christian. He has always reason for comfort. He has 
not a consolation like a swollen torrent which is dried up under the hot sun of 
adversity, but peace is his rightful possession at all times. Do you enquire 
for the Thames? You shall find it flowing in its own bed in the thick black 
night, as well as in the clear bright day. You shall discover the noble river 
when it mirrors the stars or sends back the sheen of the moon, as well as when 
multitudes of eyes gaze upon the pompous pageantry of civic procession at 
midday. You may see its waves in the hour of tempest by the lightning's flash, 
as well as in the day of calm when the sun shineth brightly on them. Ever is 
the river in its plac.. And even thus, come night1, come day, come sickness, 
come health, come what will, the peace of God which passeth all understanding 
will keep the Christian's heart and mind, through Jesus Christ.  
Nor must we exclude the idea of progress. You can leap the Thames at Cricklade, 
for the tiny brook is spanned by a narrow plank across which laughing village 
girls are tripping; but who thinks of laying down a plank at Southend, or at 
Grays? No, the river has grown: how deep! At the mouth of it, comparable to the 
sea: how broad! There go the ships, and even leviathan might play therein. Such 
is the Christian's peace. At the first, little temptations avail to mar it, and 
the troubles of life threaten to evaporate it. Be not dismayed, but quietly 
wait. When the Christian is somewhat grown, and has wandered for awhile along 
the tortuous course of a gracious experience, his peace will gather force like 
a flowing stream. Wait twenty or thirty years, till he has traversed yonder 
rich lowlands of fellowship with Christ in his sufferings, and conformity to 
his death, and you shall mark that the believer's rest will be like a river 
deep 
and broad, for he shall know the peace which was our Master's precious legacy; 
and he will cast all his care upon God, who careth for him. True peace will 
increase till it melts into the eternal rest of the beatific vision, where  
'Not a wave of trouble rolls 
Across the peaceful breast.'  
 


## Perfection: Marred by the World


The bloom of the hawthorn or White May looks like snow in Richmond Park, but 
nearer London or by the road side its virgin whiteness is sadly stained. Too 
often contact with the world has just such an effect upon our piety; we must 
away to the far off garden of Paradise to see holiness in its unsullied purity, 
and meanwhile we must be much alone with God if we would maintain a gracious 
life below.  
 


## Persecution


The cold water of persecution is often thrown on the church's face to fetch her 
to herself when she is in a swoon of indolence or pride.  
 


## Persecution: Not to Be Feared


Do not fear the frown of the world. When a blind man comes against you in the 
street you are not angry at him, you say, He is blind, poor man, or he would 
not have hurt me. So you may say of the poor woridlings when they speak evil of 
Christians: they are blind.: M'G/Ieyne.  
 


## Perseverance


'A poor woman had a supply of coal laid at her door by a charitable neighbour. 
A very little girl came out with a small fire-shovel, and began to take up a 
shovelful at a time, and carry it to a sort of bin in the cellar. I said to the 
child, 'Do you expect to get all that coal in with that little shovel?' She was 
quite confused at my question, but her answer was very striking, 'Yes, sir, if 
I work long enough.' 
Humble worker, make up for your want of ability by abundant continuance in 
well-doing, and your life-work will not be trivial. The repetition of small 
efforts will effect more than the occasional use of great talents.  
 


## Perseverance: in Doing Good


An old man in Watton, whom Mr. Thornton had in vain urged to come to church, 
was taken ill and confined to his bed. Mr. Thornton went to the cottage, and 
asked to see him. The old man, hearing his voice below, answered, in no very 
courteous tone, 'I don't want you here, you may go away.' The following day the 
curate was again at the foot of the stairs. 'Well, my friend, may I come up 
to-day, and sit beside you?' Again he received the same reply, 'I don't want 
you 
here.' Twenty-one days successively Mr. T. paid his visit to the cottage, and 
on 
the twenty-second his perseverance was rewarded. He was permitted to enter the 
room of the aged sufferer, to read the Bible, and pray by his bedside. The poor 
man recovered, and became one of the most regular attendants at the house of 
God.----Memoirs of Rev. Spencer Thornton.  
 


## Perseverance: Necessity of


In the heathery turf you will often find a plant chiefly remarkable for its 
peculiar roots; from the main stem down to the minutest fibre, you will find 
them all abruptly terminate, as if shorn or bitten off and the quaint 
superstition of the country people alleges, that once on a time it was a plant 
of singular potency for healing all sorts of maladies, and therefore the great 
enemy of man in his malignity bit off the roots, in which its virtues resided. 
The plant with this odd history, is a very good emblem of many well-meaning but 
little-effecting people. They might be defined as radictbus praemorsis, or 
rather inceptis succisis. The efficacy of every good work lies in its 
completion, and all their good works terminate abruptly, and are left off 
unfinished. The devil frustrates their efficacy by cutting off their ends; 
their un profitable history is made up of plans and projects, schemes of 
usefulness that were never gone about, and magnificent undertakings that were 
never carried forward; societies that were set a going, then left to shift for 
themselves, and forlorn beings who for a time were taken up and instructed, and 
just when they were beginning to show symptoms of improvement were cast on the 
world again.: James Hamilton, D.D.  
 


## Personal Effort: Needed for Success


According to Christ's law, every Christian is to be active in spreading the 
faith, which was delivered, not to the ministers, but to the saints, to every 
one of them, that they might maintain it, and spread it according to the gift 
which the Spirit has given them. Shall I venture a parable? A certain band of 
warlike knights had been exceedingly victorious in all their conflicts. They 
were men of valor and of indomitable courage; they had carried everything 
before them, and subdued province after province for their king. But on a 
sudden 
they said in the council-chamber, 'We have at our head a most valiant warrior, 
one whose arm is stout enough to smite down fifty of his adversaries; would it 
not be better if, leaving a few such as he to go out to the fight, the mere 
men-at-arms, who make up the ordinary ranks, were to rest at home? We should be 
much more at our ease; our horses would not so often be covered with foam, nor 
our armor be bruised, the many would enjoy abundant leisure, and great things 
would be done by the valiant few.' Now, the foremost champions, with fear and 
trembling, undertook the task and went to the conflict, and they fought well, 
as the rolls of fame can testify; to the best of their ability they unhorsed 
their foes and performed great exploits. But still, from the very hour in which 
that scheme was planned and carried out ho city was taken, no province was 
conquered. Then the knights met together, and said, 'How is this? Our former 
prestige is departed, our ranks are broken, our pennons are trailed in the 
dust, 
what is the cause of it?' When out spoke the champion, and said, 'Doubtless it 
is so, and for a reason clear and plain. How did you think that a slender band 
could do the work of all the thousands? When you all went to the fight, and 
every man took his share, e dashed upon the foe like an avalanche, and crushed 
him beneath our tramp; but now that you stay at home, and put us., who are but 
a 
handful, to fight every battle, how can you expect that great things should be 
done?' So each man resolved to put on his helmet and his armor once again, and 
hasten to the battle, and lo, the angel of victory returned.  
If we are to subdue the earth, every one of us must join in the fight. We must 
not exempt a single soldier of the cross, neither man nor woman, rich nor poor; 
but each must fight for the Lord Jesus according to his ability, that his 
kingdom may come, and that his will may be done in earth even as it is in 
heaven. We shall see great things when all agree to this and put it in 
practice.  
 


## Personal Work


I once heard a story of an American, who declared he could fight the whole 
British army, and when he was asked how he could draw so long a bow as that, he 
said, 'Why, this is what I would do: I know I am the best swordsman in the 
world, so I would go and challenge one Britisher, and kill him; then take 
another, and kill him. Thus,' said he, 'I only want time enough and I would 
kill the whole British army.' It was a ridiculous boast, but there is something 
in it which I could not bring out so well in any other way. If we want to 
conquer the world for the Lord Jesus Christ, rest assured we must do it in the 
Yankee's fashion; we must take men one by one, and these ones must be brought 
to 
Christ, or otherwise the great mass must remain untouched. Do not imagine for a 
moment that you are going to convert a nation at once; you are to convert the 
men of that nation, one by one, through the power of God's Holy Spirit. It is 
not for you to suit your machinery, and arrange your plans for the moving of a 
mass as such, you must look to the salvation of the units.  
 


## Poor: as Hearers


John Wesley always preferred the middling and lower classes to the wealthy. He 
said, 'If I might choose, I should still, as I have done hitherto, preach the 
gospel to the poor.' Preaching in Monktown church, a large old, ruinous 
building, he says, 'I suppose it has scarce had such a congregation during this 
century. Many of them were gay, genteel people, so I spoke on the first 
elements of the gospel, but I was still out of their depth. Oh, how hard it is 
to be shallow enough for a polite audience!': Anecdotes of the Wesleys.  
 


## Popery


Lightfoot observes: 'Yoke-fellows, indeed, are the Jew and Romanist above all 
people of the world, in a deluded fancying their own bravery and privilege 
above all the world besides. He that comes to read the Jewish writings, 
especially those that are of the nature of sermons, will find this to be the 
main stuffing of them, almost in every leaf and page. 'How choice a people is 
Israel! how dearly God is in love with Israel! what a happy thing it is to be 
of 
the seed of Abraham! how blessed the nation of the Jews above all nations!' And 
such stuff as this all along. And is not the style of the Romanists the very 
same tune? 'How holy the Church of Rome! what superiority and pre-eminence hath 
the church above all churches, and all the men in the world are heretics, and 
apostates, and cast-aways, if they be not Romanists.' Whereas if both these 
people would but impartially look upon themselves, they would see that there 
are 
such brands upon them as are upon no nation under heaven now extant.'  


## Position: No Barrier to Grace


Grace makes itself equally at home in the palace and the cottage. No condition 
necessitates its absence, no position precludes its flourishing. One may 
compare it in its power to live and blossom in all places to the beautiful 
blue-bell of Scotland, of which the poetess sings::  
'No rock is too high, no vale too low, 
For its fragile and tremulous form to grow: 
It crowns the mountain 
With azure bells, 
And decks the fountain 
In forest dells. 
It wreathes the ruin with clusters grey, 
Bowing and smiling the livelong day.'  
 


## Practice: Necessary to Perfection


A neighbor near my study persists in practicing upon the flute. He bores my 
ears as with an auger, and renders it almost an impossibility to think. Up and 
down his scale he runs remorselessly, until even the calamity of temporary 
deafness would almost be welcome to me. Yet he teaches me that I must practice 
if I would be perfect; must exercise myself unto godliness if I would be 
skilful; must, in fact, make myself familiar with the word of God, with holy 
living, and saintly dying. Such practice, moreover, will be as charming as my 
neighbor's flute is intolerable.  
 


## Prayer: and Activity


'A scholar at a boarding-school near London was remarked for repeating her 
lessons well. A school companion, who was idly inclined, said to her one day, 
'How is it that you always say your lessons so perfectly?' She replied, 'I 
always pray that I may say my lessons well.' 'Do you?' replied the other, 'then 
I'll pray too.' But, alas! next morning she could not repeat one word of her 
lesson. Very much confounded, she ran to her friend. 'I prayed,' said she, 'but 
I could not repeat a word of my lesson.' 'Perhaps,' rejoined the other, 'you 
took no pains to learn it.' 'Learn it! learn it!' answered the first, 'I did 
not learn it at all. I didn't know I needed to learn it, when I prayed that I 
might say it.' She loved her idleness, poor girl; and her praying was but a 
mockery.'  
 


## Prayer: Believing


Is it not a sad thing that we should think it wonderful for God to hear prayer? 
Much better faith was that of a little boy in one of the schools in Edinburgh, 
who had attended a prayer-meeting, and at last said to his teacher who 
conducted it, 'Teacher, I wish my sister could be got to read the Bible; she 
never reads it.'  'Why, Johnny, should your sister read the Bible?' 'Because if 
she should once read it, I am sure it would do her good, and she would be 
converted and be saved.' 'Do you think so, Johnny?' 'Yes, I do, sir, and I wish 
the next time there's a prayer-meeting, you would ask the people to pray for my 
sister that she may begin to read the Bible.' 'Well, well, it shall be done, 
John.' 
So the teacher gave out that a little boy was very anxious that prayer should 
be offered that his sister might begin to read the Bible. John was observed to 
get up and go out. The teacher thought it very rude of the boy to disturb the 
people in a crowded room, and so the next day when the lad came, he said, 
'John, 
I thought it was very rude of you to get up in the prayer-meeting and go out. 
You ought not to have done so.'  'Oh, sir,' said the boy, 'I did not mean to be 
rude; but I thought I should just like to go home and see my sister reading her 
Bible for the first time.' 
Thus we ought to believe, and watch with expectation for answers to our prayer. 
Do not say, 'Lord, turn my darkness into light,' and then go out with your 
candle as though you expected to find it dark. After asking the Lord to appear 
for you, expect him to do so, for according to your faith so be it unto you.  
 


## Prayer: for Help to Pray


In Dr. Ryland's memoir of Andrew Fuller is the following anecdote. At a 
conference at Sobam, a friend of slender abilities being asked to pray, knelt 
down, and Mr. Fuller and the company with him, when he found himself so 
embarrassed, that, whispering to Mr. Fuller, he said, 'I do not know how to go 
on.' Mr. F. replied in a whisper, 'Tell the Lord so.' The rest of the company 
did not hear what passed between them, but the man taking Mr. Fuller's advice 
began to confess his not knowing how to pray as he ought to pray, begging to be 
taught to pray, and so proceeded in prayer to the satisfaction of all the 
company.  
 


## Prayer: Helpful to Study


In Payson's diary is the following entry: 'Sept. 23.: Was quite dull and 
lifeless in prayer, and in consequence had no success in study.'  
 


## Prayer: Its Power against Satan


There is a huge rock upon the Swiss side of the St. Gothard road, about which 
an old legend is told by the natives of the neighboring village. The. devil was 
whisking this enormous stone along very merrily at early dawn of day, when he 
was met by a devout old woman, who being somewhat alarmed, uttered a prayer at 
the sight of the unexpected traveller. Such was the power of her prayer, that 
the demon dropped his burden at once, and there it lies, an indisputable proof 
that the devil IS no match for old ladies who know how to invoke the aid of 
heaven. Mother Church has sanctioned many a worse legend than this, for a 
truthful moral lies upon the surface. Let interceding believers make the fiend 
tremble always, by praying without ceasing. The weakest saint upon his knees is 
victorious over all the powers of hell.  
 


## Prayer: Its Power to Soften Asperities


'Two neighbors, a cooper and a farmer, were spending the evening together. Both 
were professors of religion, but of different communions. Their conversation 
was first upon topics relating to practical religion, but after a time it 
diverged to the points of difference between the two denominations to which 
they belonged. It first became a discussion, and then a dispute. The cooper was 
the first to perceive its unprofitable and injurious tendency, and remarked, 
'We 
are springing apart from each other, let us put on another hoop: let us pray.' 
They kneeled down and prayed together, after which they spent the remainder of 
the evening lovingly together, conversing on the things of the kingdom in which 
they both felt an equal interest. The suggestion of the cooper was an excellent 
one, and it were well if it were acted on more frequently by those who, like 
him, are members of the household of Christ.'  
 


## Prayer: Simile of


Prayer pulls the rope below and the great bell rings above in the ears of God. 
Some scarcely stir the bell, for they pray so languidly; others give but an 
occasional pluck at the rope; but he who wins with heaven is the man who grasps 
the rope boldly and pulls continuously, with all his might.  


## Prayer: Success in

These lads to gain the fruit must shake the tree, 
Good reader, mark the lesson writ for thee! 
If from the tree of promis'd mercy thou 
Wouldst win the good which loadeth every bough, 
Then urge the promise well with pleading cries, 
Move heaven itself with vehemence of sighs; 
Soon shall celestial fruit thy toil repay: 'Tis ripe, and waits for him who 
loves to pray. 
What if thou fail at first, yet give not o'er, 
Bestir thyself to labour more and more; 
Enlist a brother's sympathetic knee, 
The tree will drop its fruit when Iwo agree 
Entreat the Holy Ghost t give thee power, 
Then shall the fruit descend in joyful shower.  


## Prayer: Sweet Uses of


On the first of May in the olden times, according to annual custom, many 
inhabitants of London went into the fields to bathe their faces with the early 
dew upon the grass under the idea that it would render them beautiful. Some 
writers call the custom superstitious; it may have been so, but this we know, 
that to bathe one's face every morning in the dew of heaven by prayer and 
communion, is the sure way to obtain true beauty of life and character.  
 


## Prayers: of a Father


Philip James Spener had a son of eminent talents, but perverse and extremely 
vicious. All means of love and persuasion were without success. The father 
could only ft ray , which he continued to do, that the Lord might yet be 
pleased 
to save his son at any time and in any way. The son fell sick; and while lying 
on his bed in great distress of mind, nearly past the power of speech or 
motion, 
he suddenly started up, clasped his hands, and exclaimed: 'My father's prayers, 
like mountains, surround me!' Soon after his anxiety ceased a sweet peace 
spread over his face, his malady came to a crisis, and the son was saved in 
body 
and soul. He became another man. Spener lived to see his son a respectable man, 
in public office, and happily married. Such was the change of his life after 
his conversion.: N. E. Puritan.  
 


## Preacher: Learns by Communion with God


It is related that one of his hearers once asked, 'How is it that Mr. Bramwell 
always has something that is new to tell us when he preaches ?' 'Why,' said the 
person interrogated, 'you see Brother Bramwell lives so near the gates of 
heaven that he hears a great many things that we don't get near enough to hear 
anything about.'  
 


## Preacher: Must Feed the People


Fromthe deck of an Austrian gunboat we threw into the Lago Garda a succession 
of little pieces of bread, and presently small fishes came in shoals, till 
there seemed to be, as the old proverb puts it, more fish than water. They came 
to feed, and needed no music. Let the preacher give his people food, and they 
will flock around him, even if the sounding brass of rhetoric, and the tinkling 
cymbals of oratory are silent.  
 


## Preacher: Must Feed the People (2)


Everybody knows that large flocks of pigeons assemble at the stroke of the 
great clock in the square of St. Mark: believe me, it is not the music of the 
bell which attracts them, they can hear that every hour. They come, Mr. 
Preacher, for food, and no mere sound will long collect them. This is a hint 
for 
filling your meeting-house; it must be done not merely by that fine, bell-like 
voice of yours, but by all the neighbourhood's being assured that spiritual 
food 
is to be had when you open your mouth. Barley for pigeons, good sir; and the 
gospel for men and women. Try it in earnest and you cannot fail; you will soon 
be saying, 'Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as doves to their windows?'  
 


## Preacher: Should Be Faithful Unto Death


The minister of Christ should feel like the old keeper of Eddystone lighthouse. 
Life was failing fast, but summoning all his strength, he crept round once more 
to trim the lights before he died. May the Holy Ghost enable his servants to 
keep the beacon fire blazing, to warn sinners of the rocks, shoals, and 
quicksands which surround them.  
 


## Preacher: to Avoid a Lofty Style


In the town of Goslar, in the Hartz mountains, there is in the principal square 
a fountain evidently of medieval date, but the peculiarity of its construction 
is that no one can reach the water so as to fill a bucket or even get a drink 
to quench his thirst. Both the jets, and the basin into which they fall, are 
above the reach of any man of ordinary stature; yet the fountain was intended 
to supply the public with water, and it fulfils its design by a method which we 
never saw in use before; every person brings a spout or trough with him long 
enough to reach the top of the fountain and bring the water down into his 
pitcher. We are afraid that all our reverence for antiquity did not prevent the 
full exercise of our risible faculties; sixpennyworth of mason's work with a 
chisel would have made the crystal stream available to all; but no, every one 
must bring a trough or go away unsupplied.  
When preachers of the gospel talk in so lofty a style that each hearer needs to 
bring a dictionary, they remind us of the absurd fountain of Goslar. The use of 
six-syllabled jawbreaking words is simply a most ludicrous vanity. A little 
labour on the part of such pedants would save a world of profitless toil to 
their hearers, and enable those uneducated persons who have no means of 
reaching the preacher's altitude to derive some measure of instruction from his 
ministry.  
 


## Preachers: Different


Those that are all in exhortation, no whit in doctrine, are like to them that 
snuff the lamp, but pour not in oil. Again, those that are all in doctrine, 
nothing in exhortation, drown the wick in oil, but light it not; making it fit 
for use if it had fire put to it, but as it is, rather capable of good than 
profitable for the present. Doctrine without exhortation makes men all brain, 
no heart; exhortation without doctrine makes the heart full, leaves the brain 
empty. Both together make a man. One makes a wise man, the other good; one 
serves that we may know our duty, the other that we may perform it. I will 
labour in both, but I know not in whether more. Men cannot practise unless they 
know; and they know in vain if they practise not .: Bishop Hall.  
 


## Preachers: How They Gain Perspicuity


Mr. Warburton, one of the inspectors of schools, mentions in his report for 
1863, that he has nowhere heard such good reading as in a girls' school in 
Berkshire, than which none in his district bears a better character for 
instruction in what are called the higher subjects. The clergyman, who is also 
the acting manager, is rather deaf, and the girls, who are frequently heard by 
him without book, are obliged to read with unusual clearness and distinctness 
of tone and articulation, in order that he may not lose a word. The inspector 
considers the pleasure with which be listened to the girls' reading to be in 
great measure attributable to the fact of their ordinarily having to make what 
they read intelligible to one who cannot hear so well as many persons do.  
The best of teachers are those who have laboured to be understood by the 
dullest capacities. Preachers who all along have aimed to suit the educated 
never become so simple or efficient as those who have made a point of 
explaining 
even the elements of faith to the ignorant.  
 


## Preachers: Not to Preach Themselves


We ascended the Sacro Monte at Orta, expecting to find that its holy hill was 
like that at Varallo, consecrated to representations of the life of Christ. To 
our disappointment we found that everything was to the honour and glory of St. 
Francis of Assisi, who nevertheless was represented as saying, 'God forbid that 
I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.' Too often when the 
preacher should think only of his Master, and labour only to set forth the 
Redeemer's glories, he is occupied with his own style and oratory, and so 
honours himself at the expense of his Lord.  
 


## Preachers: Speak after Death


There are strange legends extant of churches which have been swallowed by 
earthquakes, or buried beneath fallen mountains. The rustics declare that they 
have heard the bells still ringing, far down in the bowels of the earth, just 
as they did when they hung aloft in the tower. Take the bells to be preachers 
and the legend is true, for being dead they yet speak, and from their graves 
they sound forth lessons not less powerful than those with which they made 
their pulpits resound while they were yet with us.  
 


## Preachers: to Be Acquainted with Human Nature


Michael Angelo, when painting an altar-piece in the conventual church, in 
Florence, in order that the figures might be as death-like as possible, 
obtained permission of the prior to have the coffins of the newly-buried opened 
and placed beside him during the night;: an appalling expedient, but successful 
in enabling him to reproduce with terrible effect, not the mortal pallor only, 
but the very anatomy of death. If we would preach well to the souls of men we 
must acquaint ourselves with their ruined state, must have their case always on 
our hearts both by night and day, must know the terrors of the Lord and the 
value of the soul, and feel a sacred sympathy with perishing sinners. There is 
no masterly, prevailing preaching without this.  
 


## Preachers: Too Learned for Real Service


The great bell of Moscow is too large to be hung, the question arises, what was 
the use of making it? Some preachers are so learned that they cannot make 
themselves understood, or else cannot bring their minds to preach plain gospel 
sermons; here, too, the same question might be asked.  
 


## Preaching: Best Manner of


The celebrated actor Garrick having been requested by Dr. Stonehouse to favour 
him with his opinion as to the manner in which a sermon ought to be delivered, 
sent him the following judicious answer: 
'Mv DEAR PUPIL, You know how you would feel and speak in a parlor concerning a 
friend who was in imminent danger of his life, and with what energetic pathos 
of diction and countenance you would enforce the observance of that which you 
really thought would be for his preservation. You could not think of playing 
the orator, of studying your emphases, cadences, and gestures, you would be 
yourself, and the interesting nature of your subject, impressing your heart, 
would furnish you with the most natural tone of voice, the most proper 
language, the most engaging features, and the most suitable and graceful 
gestures. What you would thus be in the parlour, be in the pulpit, and you will 
not fail to please, to affect, and to profit. Adieu, my dear friend.'  
 


## Preaching: Fruit and Flowers


At Hampton Court Palace every one regards with wonder the enormous vine loaded 
with so vast a multitude of huge clusters: just outside the vine-house is as 
fine a specimen of the wistaria, and when it is in full bloom, the cluster-like 
masses of bloom, cause you to think it a flower-bearing vine, as the other is a 
fruit-bearing vine. Fit emblems these two famous trees of two ministries, both 
admired, but not equally to be prized; the ministry of oratory, luxuriant in 
metaphor and poetry, and the ministry of grace, abounding in sound teaching and 
soul saving-energy. Gay as are the flower-clusters of the wistaria, no one 
mistakes them for the luscious bunches of the grape; yet, there are many 
simpletons in spiritual things who mistake sound for sense, and seem to satisfy 
their hunger not on solid meat, but on the jingle of a musical dinner bell.  
 


## Preaching: Its Force the Main Consideration


I had tried to drive certain long brass-headed nails into a wall, but had never 
succeeded except in turning up their points, and rendering them useless. When a 
tradesman came who understood his work, I noticed that he filed off all the 
points of the nails, the very points upon whose sharpness J had relied; and 
when he had quite blunted them, he drove them in as far as he pleased. With 
some consciences our fine points in preaching are worse than useless. Our keen 
distinctions and nice discriminations are thrown away on many; they need to be 
encountered with sheer force and blunt honesty. The truth must be hammered into 
them by main strength, and we know from whom to seek the needed power.   
 


## Preaching: Need of Prayer and Unction

In a Romish book by Father Faber of the Oratory, we find the following:: 'Do 
you remember the story of that religious, a Jesuit I think, who was a famous 
preacher, and whose sermons converted men by scores? It was revealed to him 
that not one of the conversions was owing to his talents or eloquence, but all 
to the prayers of an illiterate lay-brother who sat on the pulpit steps praying 
all the time for the success of the sermon. There is another story, a very 
strange one. I will not vouch for its being true, but I will quote it for the 
sake of the wise teaching it contains. A certain religious, a very popular 
preacher, was expected one day in a convent of his order, where he was a 
stranger. In the afternoon he arrived, or rather an evil spirit who personated 
him, arrived, to see what mischief he could do. It so happened that there was 
to 
be a sermon on hell preached that day by one of the monks, but he was ill and 
unable to preach. So they asked this devil to preach on hell, which he did; 
and, 
as may be supposed from his experience, a most wonderful sermon was. However, 
on 
the arrival of the real preacher, the evil one was discovered, and was obliged 
to disclose himself, and his malicious designs. Among other things he was asked 
how it was not against his interests to preach such a frightening sermon about 
hell, as it would keep people from sin. 'Not at all,' he replied, 'there was no 
unction with it, so it could do no harm!'
 


## Preaching: Personal


Two Chinese jugglers have been making a public exhibition of their skill. One 
of them is set up as a target, and the other shows his dexterity by hurling 
knives which stick into the board at his comrade's back, close to the man's 
body. These deadly weapons fix themselves between his arms and legs, and 
between 
each of his fingers, they fly past his ears, and over his head, and on each 
side 
of his neck. The art is not to hit him. Are there not to be found preachers who 
are remarkably proficient in the same art in the mental and spiritual 
departments?  
 


## Predestination


They that talk of nothing but predestination, and will not proceed in the way 
of heaven till they be satisfied on that point, do as a man that would not come 
to London, unless at his first step he might set his foot upon the top of St. 
Paul's. The Table Talk of John Selden.  
 


## Presumption: Rebuked by Trial


'The Brahmins say that Benares is not a part of this sinful earth; but that it 
is on the outside of the world. An earthquake, however, which was lately felt 
there, has rather nonplussed them, as it proves that what shakes the earth, 
shakes Benares too.' It is easy enough for those who have been long at ease to 
imagine themselves protected from the common lot of men, but a shaking trial in 
their estates or persons soon convinces them that they are as other men are. 
Spiritual presumption leads many professors to imagine that they are beyond the 
power of temptation, and are no longer such frail beings as their fellow 
Christians; let but the Lord conceal his face, or Satan assail them, and in 
their sore trouble they will discover that they are men of like passions with 
the rest.  
 


## Pride


When men refuse to hear the gospel from the lips of a gracious but uneducated 
preacher, they remind us of the Spaniard in South America, who suffered 
severely from the gout, but refused to be cured by an Indian. 'I know,' said 
he, 
'that he is a famous man, and would certainly cure me, but he is an Indian, and 
would expect to be treated with attentions which I cannot pay to a man of 
colour, and therefore I prefer remaining as I am.'  


## Pride: in Dictating to God


The petty sovereign of an insignificant tribe in North America every morning 
stalks out of his hovel, bids the sun good-morrow, and points out to him with 
his finger the course he is to take for the day. Is this arrogance more 
contemptible than ours when we would dictate to God the course of his 
providence, and summon him to our bar for his dealings with us? How ridiculous 
does man appear when he attempts to argue with his God!  
 


## Priests: Superstitious Reverence of


A writer on the manners and customs of India, says:: 'I was informed that vast 
numbers of Shoodras drink the water in which a Brahmin has dipped his foot, and 
abstain from food in the morning till this ceremony be over. Some persons do 
this every day, and others vow to attend to it for such a time, in order to 
obtain the removal of disease. Persons may be seen carrying a small quantity of 
water in a cup, and intreating the first Brahmin they see to put his toe in it. 
This person then drinks the water, and bows or prostrates to the Brahmin, who 
gives him a blessing. Some persons keep water thus sanctified in their houses.' 
 
How few steps would land Tractarians in the same degradation! Their priests are 
the channels of grace to them, from them they receive regeneration and 
absolution, and from their hands they receive the god of bread whom they adore 
and eat. Believing all this of their sacerdotal fathers, to drink the water in 
which they wash their feet would be no humiliation; their minds have stooped to 
drink far fouler puddle, they may well put their bodies on the same level.  
 


## Procrastination


It is a snowy day, and some boys have put a few bricks together, making a sort 
of square box of them; they have set up one on edge on a piece of stick, and 
have scattered under it a few crumbs. Here comes a robin, and he picks up a 
crumb or two, and while he is feeding, down comes the brick! 'I did not wait 
long,' says the robin, 'but I am caught! I did not wait long, but I cannot get 
out! I did not wait long, but I have lost my liberty! I did not wait long, but 
it may be I shall lose my life!' Ah! little robin, thou shalt be a preacher to 
some here. They have gone a little into sin, and they are inclined to-night to 
wait a little while. Take care that this is not your dolorous note one of these 
days, 'I did not wait long, but the devil caught me in his trap! I did not wait 
long, but I waited too long! I did not wait long, but I lost my soul for ever?' 
God grant that this may not be your lot.  
 


## Procrastination (2)


In Nebuchadnezzar's image, the lower the members, the coarser the metal: the 
farther off the time, the more unfit. To-day is the golden opportunity, 
to-morrow will be the silver season, next day but the brazen one, and so on, 
till at last I shall come to the toes of clay, and be turned to dust.Thomas 
Fuller. 
 


## Procrastination (2)


Be not like the foolish drunkard who, staggering home one night, saw his candle 
lit for him. 'Two candles!' said he, for his drunkenness made him see double, 
'I will blow out one,' and as he blew it out, in a moment he was in the dark. 
Many a man sees double through the drunkenness of sin; he has one life to sow 
his wild oats in, and then he half expects another in which to turn to God; so, 
like a fool, he blows out the only candle that he has, and in the dark he will 
have to lie down for ever. Haste thee, traveller, thou hast but one sun, and 
after that sets, thou wilt never reach thy home. God help thee to make haste 
now!  


## Procrastination (2)


'A Swiss traveller,' says a writer in the Edinburgh Review, 'describes a 
village, situated on the slope of a great mountain, of which the strata shelve 
in the direction of the place. Huge crags, directly overhanging the village, 
and massy enough to sweep the whole of it into the torrent below, have become 
separated from the main body of the mountain in the course of ages by great 
fissures, and now scarce adhere to it. When they give way, the village must 
perish; it is only a question of time, and the catastrophe may happen any day. 
For years past engineers have been sent to measure the width of the fissures, 
and report them constantly increasing. The villagers, for more than one 
generation, have been aware of their danger; subscriptions have been once or 
twice opened to enable them to remove; yet they live on in their doomed 
dwellings, from year to year, fortified against the ultimate certainty and 
daily probablility of destruction by the common sentiment, 'Things may last 
their time and longer.'  
Like the dwellers in this doomed village, the world's inhabitants have grown 
careless and secure in sin. The scoffers of the last days are around us, 
saying, 'Where is the promise of his coming? For since the fathers fell asleep, 
all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation.' But in 
saying this, they are too confident. Nothing is permanent that has sin about 
it, nothing secure that has wrath above it, and flames of fire beneath it. Sin 
has once deluged the world with water, it shall deluge it again with waves of 
fire. Sodom and Gomorrah are the types that foreshadow the doom of those that 
live ungodly in these latter times, and he who can walk this reeling world 
unmoved by all the tokens of its fiery doom, must either have a rock of refuge 
where his soul may rest secure, or else must have fallen into a strange 
carelessness, and a sad forgetfulness of God.  


## Procrastination: Deprecated


Do any of you remember the loss of the vessel called the 'Central America'? She 
was in a bad state, had sprung a leak and was going down, and she therefore 
hoisted a signal of distress. A ship came close to her, the captain of which 
asked, through the trumpet, 'What is amiss?' 'We are in bad repair, and are 
going down: lie by till morning,' was the answer. But the captain on board the 
rescue-ship said, 'Let me take your passengers on board now.' 'Lie by till 
morning,' was the message which came back. Once again the captain cried, 'You 
had better let me take your passengers on board now.' 'Lie by till morning,' 
was the reply which sounded through the trumpet. About an hour-and-a-half 
after, 
the lights were missing, and though no sound was heard, she and all on board 
had gone down to the fathomless abyss. O unconverted friends, for God's sake, 
do 
not say, 'Lie by till morning.' To-day, even to-day, hear ye the voice of God.  
 


## Profession: the Vanity of Mere


Forget not that the pretence of religion without the power of it is one of the 
most comfortless things in the world. It is like a man who should call his 
servant, and say to him,' Is the larder well stored?' 'There is nothing, sir, 
not even a mouldy crust.' 'Let the cloth be laid,' saith he; and it is laid, 
and all the appurtenances thereof. 'And now,' he says, 'I will sit down to my 
meal, and you shall wait upon me.' The empty dishes are brought in proper 
course; from invisible joints he cuts imperceptible slices, and from the empty 
plates he lifts upon his fork mouthfuls of nothingness and dainty morsels of 
vacuum. There, the cloth can be removed, the feaster has finished the 
atmospheric banquet, and rises from the table free from any charge of 
immoderate 
eating. Now, this may be a very pleasant operation for once, although its 
charms 
require a very poetic and imaginative mind to appreciate them; but if continued 
several days, this unsubstantial festival would, I conceive, become somewhat 
undesirable and cheerless, and in the end the guest might perish amid his empty 
platters. Yet such must be the life of the man who professes to feed on the 
bread of heaven and knows not its sustaining virtues, who boasts of drinking 
the 
water of life and has never sipped that heavenly stream.  
 


## Professors (Mere): Have No Changes


Artificial piety, like flowers in wax, droops not in the hour of drought, but 
the fair lily of true grace hangs its head if the rain of heaven be denied. 
True faith, like fire, has its attendant smoke of unbelief but presumption like 
a painted flame is all brightness. Like ships at sea, true Christians have 
their storms; but mere professors, like pictured galleys on the canvas, ride on 
an unruffled ocean. Life has its changes; 'tis death that abideth the same. 
Life has muscle, sinew, brain, spirit, and these vary in physical condition; 
but 
the petrified limbs of death lie still until the worm has devoured the carcase. 
Life weeps as well as smiles, but the ghastly grin of death relaxes not with 
anxiety or fear. Moab hath no changes; he is 'settled upon his lees: he has not 
been emptied from vessel to vessel.' 'They are not in trouble as other men, 
neither are they plagued like other men.' As no weather can give ague to 
marble, 
as no variation of temperature can bring fever to iron, so to some men the 
events of life, the temptations of prosperity, or the trials Of adversity, 
bring 
little change. Yet were it better to ebb and flow for ever like the sea, than 
rot in endless stagnation of false peace. Better to be hunted by the hounds of 
hell, and so driven to the shelter of the cross, than to dwell at ease and be 
fattening for the devil's shambles.  
 


## Professors: Too Often Deceptive


'In the sweet valley between Chamouni and the Valais, at every turn of the 
pleasant pathway, where the scent of the thyme lies richest upon its rocks, we 
shall see a little cross and shrine set under one of them, and go up to it, 
hoping to receive some happy thought of the Redeemer, by whom all these lovely 
things were made, and still consist. But when we come near, behold, beneath the 
cross a rude picture of souls tormented in red tongues of hell fire, and 
pierced by demons.'Ruskin.  
Too often the house of a fair professor turns out to be much the same; the 
beauty at a distance changes into hideous deformity when near. Oh, to be found, 
when closest watched, better than observers would at first sight have conceived 
us to be!  
 


## Progress: Measure of


Sailors would be loath to sail without using their log to test their pace, and 
show their progress. The wonder is that so many Christian professors navigate 
the sea of life, and are utterly careless whether they are making headway or 
drifting from their course. Should we not all cast overboard our log? There are 
various ways by which with readiness we may measure our progress: our prayers, 
our labours, our patience, our faith, our communion with God, our humility, may 
all serve as logs by which to measure our sailing pace.  
 


## Promises


Good old Spurstow says that some of the promises are like the almond tree: they 
blossom hastily in the very earliest spring; but, saith he, there are others 
which resemble the mulberry tree: they are very slow in putting forth their 
leaves. Then what is a man to do, if he has a mulberry tree promise which is 
late in blossoming? Why, he is to wait till it does. If the vision tarry, wait 
for it till it come, and the appointed time shall surely bring it.  


## Promptness: in Doing Good


Quick must be the hand if an impression is to be made upon the melted wax. Once 
let the wax cool and you will press the seal in vain. Cold and hard it will be 
in a few moments, therefore let the work be quickly done. When men's hearts are 
melted under the preaching of the Word, or by sickness, or the loss of friends, 
believers should be very eager to stamp the truth upon the prepared mind. Such 
opportunities are to be seized with holy eagerness. Reader, do you know of 
such? If you be a lover of the Lord Jesus, hasten with the seal before the wax 
is cool.  
 


## Prophecy: Too Often Interpreted by Imagination


All along the Oker Thai, in the Hartz, there are huge rocks towering up among 
the fir-clad hills, to which the peasants have appended names according as they 
fancy them to bear resemblance to chairs, horses, cobblers, or cocked bats. The 
likeness in most cases is such as only fancy can make out when she is in her 
most vigorous mood, nevertheless this rock must needs be called a man, and that 
a church, and there has no doubt been many a quarrel between rival observers 
who have discovered each a different image in the one pile of rock; yet the 
stones are not churches, chairs, or cobblers, and the whole business is 
childish 
and nonsensical. Interpreters of prophecy during the last few centuries have 
been most of them in the same position; one of them sees in the sublimities of 
the Revelation the form of Louis Napoleon where two or three hundred years ago 
half Christendom saw the Pope, and the other half Martin Luther. The other day 
one of the seers saw Sebastopol in the prophecies, and now another detects the 
Suez Canal, and we feel pretty sure that the Council at Rome will soon be spied 
out in Daniel or Ezekiel. The fact is, when fancy is their guide men wander as 
in a maze. Spiritualistic interpreters see, like children gazing into the fire, 
not what is really before them, but what is in their own heads. Great truths 
are 
in the Prophets and in the precious book of Revelation, but your fanciful 
theologians turn these sublimities of truth into the toys of children, when 
they give their imagination license to act as an expositor.  
 


## Prosperity: Evils of


Too long a period of fair weather in the Italian valleys creates such a 
superabundance of dust that the traveller sighs for a shower. He is smothered, 
his clothes are white, his eyes smart, the grit even grates between his teeth 
and finds its way down his throat; welcome are the rain clouds, as they promise 
to abate the nuisance. Prosperity long continued breeds a plague of dust even 
more injurious, for it almost blinds the spirit and insinuates itself into the 
soul; a shower or two of grief proves a mighty blessing, for it deprives the 
things of earth of somewhat of their smothering power. A Christian making money 
fast is just a man in a cloud of dust, it will fill his eyes if he be not 
careful. A Christian full of worldly care is in the same condition, and had 
need look to it lest he be choked with earth. Afflictions might almost be 
prayed 
for if we never had them, even as in long stretches of fair weather men beg for 
rain to lay the dust.  
 


## Providence


An old authority assures us that 'the Jews fancy, concerning the cloud that 
conducted Israel through the wilderness, that it did not only show them the 
way, but also plane it; that it did not only lead them in the way which they 
must go, but also fit the way for them to go upon it; that it cleared all the 
mountains and smoothed all the rocks; that it cleared all the bushes and 
removed 
all the rubs.'  
What is probably a mere legend as to the type is abundantly true of the 
providence of God, which it so accurately represents. Our gracious God not only 
leads us in the way of mercy, but he prepares our path before us, providing for 
all our wants even before they occur.  
 


## Providence: Rightly Places Us


Suppose the mole should cry, 'How I could have honoured the Creator had I been 
allowed to fly!' it would be very foolish, for a mole flying would be a most 
ridiculous object; while a mole fashioning its tunnels and casting up its 
castles, is viewed with admiring wonder by the naturalist, who perceives its 
remarkable suitability to its sphere. The fish of the sea might say, 'How could 
I display the wisdom of God if I could sing, or mount a tree, like a bird;' but 
a dolphin in a tree would be a very grotesque affair, and there would be no 
wisdom of God to admire in trouts singing in the groves; but when the fish cuts 
the wave with agile fin, all who have observed it say how wonderfully it is 
adapted to its habitat, how exactly its every bone is fitted for its mode of 
life. Brother, it is just so with you. If you begin to say, 'I cannot glorify 
God where I am, and as I am,' I answer, neither could you anywhere if not where 
you are. Providence, which arranged your surroundings, appointed them so that, 
all things being considered, you are in the position in which you can best 
display the wisdom and the grace of God.  
 


## Providence: the Guardian of Our Weakness


That image in Lowell's poem of 'The Changeling' fascinates me. It is so much 
what I am and ever wish to be.  
'I feel as weak as a violet 
Alone 'neath the awful sky.'  
Unable to defend myself and apparently undefended, yet guarded by omnipotent 
love, I would fain pour out a perfume of praise to the Great Invisible who 
watches over me, and would feel that under the care of Providence I may claim 
the sweetness of the poet's next stanza.  
'As weak, yet as trustful also; 
For the whole year long I see 
All the wonders of faithful nature 
Still worked for the love of me. 
Winds wander and dews drip earthward, - 
Rains fall, suns rise and set, 
Earth whirls, and all but to prosper 
A poor little violet.'  
 


## Prudence (False): Its Mischief


James the First once said of armour, that 'it was an excellent invention, for 
it not only saved the life of the wearer, but it hindered him from doing harm 
to anybody else.' Equally destructive to all usefulness is that excessive 
prudence upon which some professor pride themselves; not only do they escape 
all persecution, but they are never able to strike a blow, much less fight a 
battle for the Lord Jesus.  
 


## Puffery: Spiritual


When we read the exaggerated accounts which are so frequently issued, lauding 
to the skies the successful labours of certain evangelists of doubtful 
vocation, 
we are reminded of the battle of Aliwal, of which an officer wrote, 'Aliwal was 
the battie of the despatch, for none of us knew we had fought a battle until 
the particulars appeared in a document which did more than justice to every one 
concerned.' Is there not quite enough religious fiction abroad without filling 
corners of newspapers and magazines therewith? We know who they were of old who 
sounded a trumpet before them. God's real works of grace are too sublime to 
need the arts of puffery to publish them.  
 


## Pulpit


Clemens Brentano, a literary acquaintance of Dr. Krummacher, and a Catholic, 
once said to the doctor, 'Till you Protestants pull down the chatter-box,' 
('Plapperkasten,') be meant the pulpit, 'or, at least, throw it into the 
corner, where it ought to be, there is no hope of you.' I could only reply to 
him, 'It is true indeed, that our 'Plapperkasten' stands greatly in the way of 
you Catholics.'  
The pulpit is the Thermopyho of Protestantism, the tower of the flock, the 
Palladium of the church of God. Well might Paul magnify his office, for not 
only Glasgow but the city of our God 'flourishes by the preaching of the word.' 
 
 


## Purpose: Unity of Purpose


When Audubon the celebrated American ornithologist was in Paris he grew quite 
weary of it, and his diary does not contain a cheerful word about that gay city 
until he writes, 'The stock-pigeon roosts in the trees of the garden of the 
Tuileries in great numbers; blackbirds also do the same, and are extremely 
noisy before dark; some few rooks and magpies are seen there also. In the 
Jardin, or walks of the Palais Royal, common sparrows are prodigiously 
plentiful. The mountain finch passes in scattered numbers over Paris at this 
season, going northerly.' So also when in London the great naturalist was quite 
out of his element, and only seemed pleased when a flight of wildfowl passed 
over the city. Here was the secret of his success: his complete absorption in 
his one study: birds alone had charms for him. We who would attain to eminence 
in the service of Christ must let the love of souls, in an equal way, master 
and 
engross us. When writing a paper for the Natural History Society upon the 
habits 
of the wild pigeon, Audubon says, 'So absorbed was my whole soul and spirit in 
the work, that I felt as if I were in the woods of America, among the pigeons, 
and my ears were filled with the sound of their rustling wings.' We should all 
write, speak, and preach for our Lord Jesus far more powerfully if our love to 
the Lord were a passion so dominant as to make the great realities of eternity 
vividly real and supremely commanding in our minds.  
 


## Purpose: Unity of


It is said of Thomas Pett, the miser, that his pulse rose and fell with the 
funds. He never lay down or rose that he did not bless the inventor of compound 
interest. His one gloomy apartment was never brightened with coal, candle, or 
the countenance of a visitor, and he never ate a morsel at his own expense. Of 
course he made money, for he gave himself wholly to it; and we ought not to 
forget that the same single-mindedness and self-denial would make Christians 
rich towards God. What is wanted in the service of Christ, is the same unity of 
purpose which has ruled all men who have won the object for which they lived. 
He who makes God's glory the one only aim before which all other things bow 
themselves, is the man to bring honour to his Lord.  
 


## Quarrels


In most quarrels there is a fault on both sides. A quarrel may be compared to a 
spark, which cannot be produced without a flint as well as a steel; either of 
them may hammer on wood for ever, no fire will follow.: South.  
 


## Questions: Foolish Theological


The follies of the schoolmen should be a warning to all those who would mingle 
metaphysical speculations or prophetical theories with the simple doctrines of 
the Bible. There. was among those learned men such a rage for Aristotle, that 
his ethics were frequently read to the people instead of the gospel, and the 
teachers themselves were employed either in wresting the words of Scripture to 
support the most monstrous opinions, or in discussing the most trivial 
questions. Think of men gravely debating whether the angel Gabriel appeared to 
the Virgin Mary in the shape of a serpent, of a dove, of a man, or of a woman? 
Did he seem to be young or old? In what dress was he? Was his garment white or 
of two colours? Was his linen clean or foul? Did he appear in the morning, 
noon, or evening? What was the colour of the Virgin's hair? &c. Think of all 
this nonsense veiled in learned terms and obscure phrases! While human minds 
were engaged in weaving such cobwebs as these, no progress was made in real 
knowledge, and the gloom of the dark ages deepened into tenfold night. We are 
much in danger of the same evil from another quarter. The reign of obscure 
nonsense and dogmatic trifling may yet return. An ultra-spiritual sect has 
arisen whose theological language is a jargon, whose interpretations are 
mystical, whose prophetical hypotheses are ridiculous, and whose arrogance is 
superlative. To leave the consideration of well-known and soul saving truths to 
fight over unimportant subtleties, is to turn our corn fields into poppy 
gardens. To imagine that the writers of unintelligible mysticism are men of 
great depth, is to find wisdom in the hootings of owls. True spirituality shuns 
the obscure and the dilettanti, and delights in the plain and practical; but 
there is much to fascinate in the superfine shams of the hour. Quintilian 
justly observes that the obscurity of an author is generally in proportion to 
his incapacity; and we might add, that the ferocity of a bigot is frequently in 
proportion to the absurdity of his belief. Some are zealots for a certain 
'theory of 666, and the two witnesses, and the little horn, who would be far 
better employed in training up their children in the fear of God, or listening 
for their instruction to a sober preacher of the word of God. It is a most 
fitting thing to be looking for the coming of the Lord, but a most miserable 
waste of time to be spinning theories about it, and allowing the millions 
around us to perish in their sins. Ragged-schools, orphanages, 
street-preaching, 
tract distributing, almsgiving, these are the present and pressing questions 
for 
the Christian church; whether the stream of the Euphrate is likely to diminish, 
or the Dead Sea to flow into the Mediterranean, may be settled in less needy 
times.  
 


## Reason and Faith


An old writer says:: Faith and Reason may be compared to two travellers: Faith 
is like a man in full health, who can walk his twenty or thirty miles at a time 
without suffering; Reason is like a little child, who can only, with 
difficulty, accomplish three or four miles. 'Well,' says this old writer, 'on a 
given day Reason says to Faith, 'O good Faith, let me walk with thee;' Faith 
replies, 'O Reason, thou canst never walk with me!' However, to try their 
paces, 
they set out together, but they soon find it hard to keep company. When they 
come to a deep river, Reason says, 'I can never ford this,' but Faith wades 
through it singing. When they reach a lofty mountain, there is the same 
exclamation of despair; and in such cases, Faith, in order not to leave Reason 
behind, is obliged to carry him on his back; and,' adds the writer, 'oh! what a 
luggage is Reason to Faith!'  
 


## Regeneration: Need of


A raw countryman having brought his gun to the gun-smith for repairs, the 
latter is reported to have examined it, and finding it to be almost too far 
gone 
for repairing, said, 'Your gun is in a very worn-out, ruinous, good-for-nothing 
condition, what sort of repairing do you want for it ?' 'Well,' said the 
countryman, 'I don't see as I can do with anything short of a new stock, lock, 
and barrel; that ought to set it up again.' 'Why,' said the smith, 'you had 
better have a new gun altogether.' 'Ah!' was the reply, 'I never thought of 
that; and it strikes me that's just what I do want. A new stock, lock, and 
barrel; why that's about equal to a new gun altogether, and that's what I'll 
have.'  
Just the sort of repairing that man's nature requires. The old nature cast 
aside as a complete wreck and good for nothing, and a new one imparted.  
 


## Religion: Must Be Personal


'A little girl, whom we will call Ellen, was some time ago helping to nurse a 
sick gentleman, whom she loved very dearly. One day he said to her, 'Ellen, it 
is time for me to take my medicine, I think. Will you pour it out for me? You 
must measure just a table-spoonful, and then put it in that wine-glass close 
by.' Ellen quickly did so, and brought it to his bedside; but, instead of 
taking it in his own hand, he quietly said, 'Now, dear, will you drink it for 
me?' 'Me drink it! What do you mean? I am sure I would, in a minute, if it 
would 
cure you all the same; but you know it won't do you any good, unless you take 
it yourself.' 'Won't it, really? No, I suppose it will not. But, Ellen, if you 
can't take my medicine for me, I can't take your salvation for you. You must go 
to Jesus, and believe in him for yourself.' In this way he tried to teach her 
that each human being must seek salvation for himself and repent, and believe, 
and obey, for himself.'  
 


## Religion: Taken upon Trust


It is a preposterous thing that men can venture their souls where they will not 
venture their money; for they will take their religion upon trust, but would 
not trust a synod about the goodness of half-a-crown.: William Penn.  
 


## Religious Life: Not Mere Imitation


'At one of the late grand reviews in Eastern Prussia, says a German paper, a 
brigade of artillery was ordered to pass at full gallop over a piece of uneven 
ground, intersected by a ditch full of water. One of the guns, from the horses 
not making a sufficient spring, got stuck in the ditch. The first gunner, a man 
of great strength, jumped down into the water and, setting his shoulders to one 
of the wheels, lifted it out of the mud, and, resuming his seat, the gun 
crossed the ditch. Prince Augustus, of Prussia, who came up at the moment, 
cried, 'Bravo, my lad,' and tearing off a strip from his sash, gave it to the 
artilleryman, telling him to fasten it to his sword-belt in remembrance. In the 
evening, the soldier, when in his barracks, was surprised by receiving a 
gratuity of 150 golden crowns. A short time afterwards, another artilleryman 
having heard this anecdote, wished in his turn to display his strength. Prince 
Augustus, when one day at the arsenal of Berlin, ordered a 24-pounder to be 
mounted on its carriage. The man in question immediately raised the piece from 
the ground, and, unassisted, put it on its carriage. The prince, however, said, 
'This man is a fool: he has risked his limbs, and wasted his strength without 
any necessity. Let him be under arrest for three days.'  
Thus, Galignarn's Messenger furnishes us with a warning against being mere 
copyists. An action may from the tim e and circumstances be noble and 
praiseworthy in one man, but another would render himself ridiculous who, 
forgetting the surrounding circumstances, should merely repeat the action 
itself. True grace, like a truly soldierly spirit, guides its possessor as 
emergencies arise, but that mimicry of religion which only follows precedents 
is to be despised.  


## Remembrance: How to Be Had in


Sir Bernard Burke thus touchingly writes in his Vicissitudes of Families:: 'In 
1850 a pedigree research caused me to pay a visit to the village of Fyndern, 
about five miles south-west of Derby. I sought for the ancient hail. Not a 
stone remained to tell where it had stood! I entered the church. Not a single 
record of a Finderne was there! I accosted a villager, hoping to glean some 
stray traditions of the Findernes. 'Findernes!' said he, 'we have no Findernes 
here, but we have something that once belonged them: we have Findernes' 
flowers.' 'Show them me,' I replied, and the old man led me into a field which 
still retained faint traces of terraces and foundations. 'There,' said he, 
pointing to a bank of 'garden flowers grown wild,' 'there are the Findernes' 
flowers, brought by Sir Geoffrey from the Holy Land, and do what we will, they 
will never die!' 
So be it with each of us. Should our names perish, may the truths we taught, 
the virtues we cultivated, the good works we initiated, live on and blossom 
with undying energy,  
'When time his withering hand hath laid 
On battlement and tower.'  
 


## Repentance: (Thorough): Searches Out Sin


When a wound in a soldier's foot refuses to heal, the surgeon examines it very 
minutely, and manipulates every part. Each bone is there, and in its place; 
there is no apparent cause for the inflammation, but yet the wound refuses to 
heal. The surgeon probes and probes again, until his lancet comes into contact 
with a hard foreign substance. 'Here it. is,' saith he, 'a bullet is lodged 
here; this must come out, or the wound will never close.' Thus may some 
concealed sin work long disquiet in a. seeking soul. May the Lord search us and 
try us, and see if there be any evil way in us, and. lead us in the way 
everlasting.  
 


## Repentance: Must Be Real


The gondoliers at Venice, when we were sojourning in that queen of the 
Adriatic, frequently quarrelled with each other, and used such high words and 
ferocious gestures that we were afraid murder would come of it; yet they never 
came to blows, it was only their rough way of disputing. Often and often have 
we 
heard men upbraiding themselves for their sins,. and crying out against the 
evil 
which their follies have wrought them, yet these very people have continued in 
their transgressions, and have even gone from bad to worse. They barked too 
much 
at sin to fall to and destroy it. Their enmity to evil was mere feigning; like 
the sword-play of the stage, which looks like earnest fight, but no wounds are 
given or received. Let those who play at repentance remember that they who 
repent in mimicry shall go to hell in. reality.  
 


## Reproofs: to Be Given in Love


Preaching on John 13:14: the duty of disciples to wash one another's feet: Mr. 
Finlayson, of Helmsdale, observed, 'One way in which disciples wash one 
another's feet is by reproving one another. But the reproof must not be couched 
in angry words, so as to destroy the effect; nor in tame, so as to fail of 
effect. Just as in washing a brother's feet, you must not use boiling water to 
scald, nor frozen water to freeze them.'  
 


## Resignation: Sustained by Faith


The habit of resignation is the root of peace. A godly child had a ring given 
him by his mother, and he greatly' prized it, but on a sudden he unhappily lost 
his ring, and he cried bitterly. Recollecting himself, he stepped aside and 
prayed; after which his sister laughingly said to him, 'Brother, what is the 
good of praying about a ring: will praying bring back your ring?' 'No, sister,' 
said he, 'perhaps not, but praying has done this for me, it has made me quite 
willing to do without the ring, if it is God's will; and is not that almost as 
good as having it?' Thus faith quiets us by resignation, as a babe is hushed in 
his mother's bosom. Faith makes us quite willing to do without the mercy which 
once we prized; and when the heart is content to be without the outward 
blessing, it is as happy as it would be with it; for it is at rest.  


## Resignation: Want of Rebuked


A lady who had lost a beloved child, was so oppressed with grief; that she even 
secluded herself from the society of her own family, and kept herself locked in 
her chamber, but was at length prevailed on by her husband to come down stairs, 
and take a walk in the garden. While there, she stooped to pluck a flower; but 
her husband appeared as though he would hinder her. She plaintively said, 
'What! deny a flower!' He replied, 'You have denied God your flower, and surely 
you ought not to think it hard in me to deny you mine.' The lady suitably felt 
the gentle reproof; and had reason to say, 'A word spoken in season, how good 
is it!' 
 


## Resolution: Overcoming Difficulties


Look at that bare perpendicular mountain side: why, it is worse than 
perpendicular, it overhangs the lake; yet the bold Tyrolese have carried a road 
right along the bald face of the rock, by blasting out a gallery, or, as it 
looks from below, by chiselling out a groove. One would have readily written 
down that feat as impossible, and yet the road is made, and we have travelled 
it from Riva into the Tyrol, the Lago Garda lying far below our feet. 
Henceforth that road shall be to us a cheering memory when our task is more 
than 
usually difficult. If anything ought to be done it shall be done. With God in 
front, we shall soon leave difficulties in the rear, transformed into memorials 
of victory.  
 


## Responsibility


John Brown, of Haddington, said to a young minister, who complained of the 
smallness of his congregation, 'It is as large a one as you will want to give 
account for in the day of judgment.' The admonition is appropriate; not to 
ministers alone, but to all teachers.  


## Resurrection


The doctrine of the resurrection is full of joy to the bereaved. It clothes the 
grave with flowers, and wreathes the tomb with unfading laurel. The sepulchre 
shines with alight brighter than the sun, and death grows fair, as we say, in 
full assurance of faith, 'I know that my brother shall rise again.' Rent from 
the ignoble shell the pearl is gone to deck the crown of the Prince of Peace; 
buried beneath the sod the seed is preparing to bloom in the King's garden. 
Altering a word or two of Beattie's verse we may even now find ourselves 
singing:  
'Tis night and the landscape is lovely no more: 
Yet ye beautiful woodlands I mourn not for you;  For morn is approaching your 
charms to restore, 
Perfumed with fresh fragrance, and glittering with dew: 
Nor yet for the ravage of winter I mourn; 
Kind nature the embryo blossom will save; 
The spring shall yet visit the mouldering urn; 
The day shall yet dawn on the night of the grave.'  
 


## Revival: Absence and Presence of


The decline of a revival is a great testing season. It discovers the true 
believers by chilling the false. A frosty night or two suffices to nip all the 
exotic plants of a garden; but the hardy shrubs, the true natives of the soil, 
live on even in the severest cold. Converts raised in the hot-bed of excitement 
soon droop and die if the spiritual temperature of the church falls below 
summer heat: what are these worth compared with the hardy children of divine 
grace, whose inward life will continue in enduring vigour when all around is 
dead! Yet we do not desire to see the revival spirit droop among us, for even 
the evergreens of our garden delight in a warmer season, for then they send 
forth their shoots and clothe themselves with new leaves; and thus it will be 
seen that the best of the saints are all the better for the holy glow of the 
'times of refreshing.'  
 


## Reward: of Benevolence Sometimes Immediate


Occasionally a benevolent action wrought in faith brings with it an 
instantaneous recompense in kind; therein Providence is seen as smiling upon 
the deed. The late John Andrew Jones, a poor Baptist minister, whilst walking 
in Cheapside, was appealed to by some one he knew for help. He had but a 
shilling in the world, and poised it in his mind, to give or not to give? The 
greater distress of his acquaintance prevailed, and he gave his all, walking 
away with a sweet remembrance of the promise, 'He that hath pity upon the poor, 
lendeth unto the Lord, and that which he hath given, will he pay him again.' He 
had not gone a hundred yards further before he met a gentleman who said, 'Ah, 
Mr. Jones, I am, glad to see you. I have had this sovereign in my waistcoat 
pocket this week past for some poor minister, and you may as well have it.' Mr. 
Jones was wont to add, when telling the story, 'If I had not stopped to give 
relief I should have missed the gentleman and the sovereign too.'  
 


## Rich: Danger of the


A holy woman was wont to say of the rich: 'They are hemmed round with no common 
misery; they go down to hell without thinking of it, because their staircase 
thither is of gold and porphyry.'  
 


## Riches: Danger of


Crossing the Col D'Obbia, the mule laden with our luggage sank in the snow, nor 
could it be recovered until its load was removed; then, but not till then, it 
scrambled out of the hole it had made, and pursued its journey. It reminded us 
of mariners casting out the lading into the sea to save the vessel, and we were 
led to meditate upon the dangers of Christians heavily laden with earthly 
possessions, and the wise way in which the gracious Father unloads them by 
their losses that they may be enabled to pursue their journey to heaven, and no 
longer sink in the snow of carnal-mindedness.  
 


## Riches: Ruined by


Do not be over-anxious about riches. Get as much of true wisdom and goodness as 
you can; but be satisfied with a very moderate portion of this world's good. 
Riches may prove a curse as well as a blessing.  
I was walking through an orchard, looking about me, when I saw a low tree laden 
more heavily with fruit than the rest. On a nearer examination, it appeared 
that the tree had been dragged to the very earth, and broken by the weight of 
its treasures. 'Oh!' said I, gazing on the tree, 'here lies one who has been 
ruined by his riches.'  
In another part of my walk, I came up with a shepherd, who was lamenting the 
loss of a sheep that lay mangled and dead at his feet. On enquiry about the 
matter, he told me that a strange dog had attacked the flock, that the rest of 
the sheep had got away through a hole in the hedge, but that the ram now dead 
had more wool on his back than the rest, and the thorns of the hedge held him 
fast till the dog had worried him. 'Here is another,' said I, 'ruined by his 
riches.'  
At the close of my ramble, I met a man hobbling along on two wooden legs, 
leaning on two sticks. 'Tell me,' said I, 'my poor fellow, how you came to lose 
your legs?' 'Why, sir,' said he, 'in my younger days I was a soldier. With a 
few comrades I attacked a party of the enemy, and overcame them, and we began 
to load ourselves with spoil. My comrades were satisfied with little, but I 
burdened myself with as much as I could carry. We were pursued; my companions 
escaped, but I was overtaken and so cruelly wounded, that I only saved my life 
afterwards by losing my legs. It was a bad affair, sir; but it is too late to 
repent of it now.' 'Ah, friend,' thought I, 'like the fruit tree, and the 
mangled sheep, you may date your downfall to your possessions. It was your 
riches that ruined you.'  
When I see so many rich people, as I do, caring so much for their bodies, and 
so little for their souls, I pity them from the bottom of my heart, and 
sometimes think there are as 'many ruined by riches as by poverty. 'They that 
will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and 
hurtful 
lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.' 1 Timothy 6:9. The prayer 
will suit you, perhaps, as well as it does me, 'Give me neither poverty nor 
riches; feed me with food convenient for me: lest I be full, and deny thee, and 
say; Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God 
in vain.' Proverbs 30:8-9.: Old Humphrey.  
 


## Rising in the World: Ambition for


Ambition, a good enough thing within reasonable bounds, is every Apollyon among 
men, when it gets the mastery over them. Have you ever seen boys climbing a 
greasy pole to reach a hat or a handkerchief? If so, you will have noticed that 
the aspiring youths for the most part adopt plans and tricks quite as slimy as 
the pole; one covers his hands with sand, another twists a knotted cord, and 
scarcely one climbs fairly, and he is the one boy whose chance is smallest. How 
plainly see we the politician's course in these young rascals; the Right 
Honourable Member for the town of Corruption vies with the equally Right 
Honourable representative for the county of Bribery; the most noble 
Conservative place-hunter will not be outdone by the Liberal office-lover; a 
man 
must have done a world of planing and shaving, chopping and chiselling, before 
he can reach the Treasury Bench. Nor less so is it in the path of trade. Small 
dealers and great contractors eager to rise, are each in their measure to Satan 
what a covey of partridges are to a sportsman, fair game if he can but reach 
them. The hasty desire to rise is the cause of many a fall. Those who see the 
glittering heaps of gold before them are frequently in so much haste to thrust 
their arms in up to the elbow among the treasure that they take short cuts, 
leave the beaten road of honest labour, break through hedges, and find 
themselves ere long in a ditch. It is hard to keep great riches without sin, 
and 
we have heard that it is harder still to get them. Walk warily, successful 
friend! Growing wealth will prove no blessing to thee unless thou gettest 
growing grace. Prosperity destroys a fool and endangers a wise man; be on thy 
guard, good friend, for whether thou be the one or the other, thy testing hour 
is come.  
 


## Sabbath: Need to Be Awakened for


At Harzburg, in the Hartz Mountains, we were awakened early in the morning, 
according to an ancient custom, by the sound of a trumpet, which made us pray 
that when the last trumpet sounds it may awaken us to an endless Sabbath. It 
were well if all hearts and minds heard at the dawn of the Lord's-day, 'The 
sound as of a trumpet,' so that every faculty might be aroused to the highest 
activity of holy service. Sleepy hearing, praying, and singing are terrible; 
sleepy preaching and teaching are worse, yet how common they are, and how 
needful is the trumpet at the ear of many!  
 


## Sabbath: Views of Heaven Then Enjoyed


When a gentleman was inspecting a house in Newcastle, with a view to hiring it 
as a residence, the landlord took him to the upper window, expatiated on the 
extensive prospect, and added, 'You can see Durham Cathedral from this window 
on a Sunday;' 'Why on a Sunday above any other day?' enquired our friend, with 
some degree of surprise. The reply was conclusive enough. 'Because on that day 
there is no smoke from those tall chimneys.' Blessed is the Sabbath to us when 
the earth-smoke of care and turmoil no longer beclouds our view; then can our 
souls full often behold the goodly land, and the city of the New Jerusalem.  
 


## Safety of Believers


A British subject may be safe although surrounded by enemies in a distant land: 
not that he hath strength to contend alone against armed thousands, but because 
he is a subject of our queen. A despot on his throne, a horde of savages in 
their desert, have permitted a helpless traveller to pass unharmed, like a lamb 
among lions: although like lions looking on a lamb, they thirsted for his 
blood: because they knew his sovereign's watchfulness, and feared his 
sovereign's power. The feeble stranger has a charmed life in the midst of his 
enemies, because a royal arm unseen encompasses him as with a shield. The power 
thus wielded by an earthly throne may suggest and symbolise the perfect 
protection of Omnipotence. A British subject's confidence in his queen may 
rebuke the feeble faith of a Christian. '0 thou of little faith, wherefore 
didst 
thou doubt ?' What though there be fears within and fightings without, he who 
bought his people with his own blood cannot lose his inheritance, and will not 
permit any enemy to wrest from his hand the satisfaction of his soul. The man 
with a deceitful heart and a darkened mind, a feeble frame and a slippery way, 
a fainting heart and a daring foe: the man would stumble and fall: but the 
member of Christ's body cannot drop off; the portion of the Redeemer cannot be 
wrenched from his grasp. 'Ye are his.' Christ is the safety of a Christian.: W. 
Arnof.  
 


## Safety of Feeble Saints


You can buy complete sets of all the flowers of the Alpine district at the 
hotel near the foot of the Rosenlaui glacier, very neatly pressed and enclosed 
in cases. Some of the flowers are very common, but they must be included, or 
the flora would not be completely represented. The botanist is as careful to 
see that the common ones are there, as he is to note that the rarer specimens 
are not excluded. Our blessed Lord will be sure to make a perfect collection of 
all the flowers of his field, and even the ordinary believer, the everyday 
worker, the common convert, will not be forgotten. To Jesus' eye, there is 
beauty in all his plants, and each one is needed to perfect the flora of 
Paradise. May I be found among his flowers, if only as one out of myriad 
daisies, who with sweet simplicity shall look up and wonder at his love for 
ever.  
 


## Saints: Preserve the World


We saw in Venice a picture of St. Mark and other holy champions delivering the 
fair city from the devil, who had resolved to raise a great storm in the 
Adriatic, flood the lagunes, and drown the inhabitants of the 'bride of the 
sea.' All mere legend and lie, but for all that capable of mirroring the truth 
that the intercession of saints and God's peculiar regard for them have 
oftentimes delivered the church.  
 


## Saints: Their Real Worth


A piece of plate may become battered and scratched, so that its beauty is 
hopelessly gone, but it loses not its real worth; put it into the scale, and 
its weight and not its fashion shall be the estimate of its preciousness; throw 
it into the melting-pot and its purity will show its actual value. So there are 
many outward circumstances which may spoil the public repute in which a 
Christian is held, but his essential preciousness remains unchanged. God values 
him at as high a rate as ever. His unerring balance and crucible are not guided 
by appearances. How content may we be to be vile in the sight of men if we are 
accepted of the Lord!  
 


## Saints: What They Should Be


In the Cathedral of St. Mark, in Venice: a marvelous building, lustrous with an 
Oriental splendor far beyond description: there are pillars said to have been 
brought from Solomon's Temple; these are of alabaster, a substance firm and 
durable as granite, and yet transparent, so that the light glows through them. 
Behold an emblem of what all true pillars of the church should be: firm in 
their faith, and transparent in their character; men of simple mould, ignorant 
of tortuous and deceptive ways, and yet men of strong will, not readily to be 
led aside, or bent from their uprightness. A few such alabaster men we know; 
may 
the great Master- builder place more of them in his temple!  
 


## Salvation: in Christ


We lately read in the papers an illustration of the way of salvation. A man had 
been condemned in a Spanish court to be shot, but being an American citizen and 
also of English birth, the consuls of the two countries interposed, and 
declared that the Spanish authorities had no power to put him to death. What 
did 
they do to secure his life, when their protest was not sufficient? They wrapped 
him up in their flags, they covered him with the Stars and Stripes and the 
Union 
Jack, and defied the executioners. 'Now fire a shot if you dare, for if you do 
so, you defy the nations represented by those flags, and you will bring the 
powers of those two great empires upon you.' There stood the man, and before 
him 
the soldiery, and though a single shot might have ended his life, yet he was as 
invulnerable' as though encased in triple steel. Even so Jesus Christ has taken 
my poor guilty soul ever since I believed in him, and has wrapped around me the 
blood-red flag of his atoning sacrifice, and before God can destroy me or any 
other soul that is wrapped in the atonement, he must insult his Son and 
dishonor his sacrifice, and that he will never do, blessed be his name.  


## Salvation: near


It is said that some years ago a vessel sailing on the northern coast of the 
South American continent, was observed to make signals of distress. When hailed 
by another vessel, they reported themselves as 'Dying for water!' 'Dip it up 
then,' was the response, 'you are in the mouth of the Amazon river.' There was 
fresh water all around them, they had nothing to do but to dip it up, and yet 
they were dying of thirst, because they thought themselves to be surrounded by 
the salt sea. How often are men ignorant of their mercies? How sad that they 
should perish for lack of knowledge! Jesus is near the seeker even when he is 
tossed upon oceans of doubt. The sinner has but to stoop down and drink and 
live; and yet he is ready to perish, as if salvation were hard to find.  
 


## Salvation: Theme for Thought


I have heard of a certain divine, that he used always to carry about with him a 
little book. This tiny volume had only three leaves in it; and truth to tell, 
it contained not a single word. The first was a leaf of black paper, black as 
jet; the next was a leaf of red-scarlet; and the last was a leaf of white, 
without spot. Day by day he would look upon this singular book, and at last he 
told the secret of what it meant. He said, 'Here is the black leaf that is my 
sin, and the wrath of God which my sin deserves; I look, and look, and think it 
is not black enough to represent my guilt, though it is as black as black can 
be. The red leaf reminds me of the atoning sacrifice, and the precious blood; 
and I delight to look at it, and weep, and look again. The white leaf 
represents 
my soul, as it is washed in Jesus' blood and made white as snow.' The little 
book was fuller of meaning than many a learned folio.  


## Sceptics and Controversial Divines


The old fable tells us of a boy who mounted a scavenger's cart with base intent 
to throw dirt at the moon; whereat another boy, with better intentions, but 
scarcely less folly, came running with a basin of water to wash the moon, and 
make its face clean again. Certain skeptics are for ever inventing new 
infidelities with which they endeavor to defile the fair face of the gospel, 
and many ministers forsake the preaching of Christ, and him crucified, to 
answer their endless quibbles: to both of these the ancient fable may be 
instructive.  
 


## Schools


By order of Government the roads in Prussia are lined on each side with fruit 
trees. Riding once, early in September, from Berlin to Halle, an American 
traveller noticed that some of the trees had a wisp of straw attached to them. 
He enquired of the, coachman what it meant. He replied that those trees bore 
choice fruits, and the straw was a notice to the public not to take fruit from 
those trees without special permission. 'I fear,' said the traveller, 'that in 
my country such a notice would be but an invitation to roguish boys to attack 
those very trees.' 'Haben Sie keine Sc/lutes?' (' Have you no schools?') was 
his significant rejoinder. Rest assured, dear reader, that next to godliness, 
education is the mainstay of order.  
 


## Schools (2)


Riding the other day over Westminster Bridge I observed a noble bull quietly 
walking along, although there was a perfect hurly-burly of cabs, horses, 
carriages, whips and men all around him. I wondered to see the powerful beast 
walking so demurely, and only ceased to marvel when I noticed that a herdsman 
had his hand in a large ring which was inserted in the creature's nose. Here, 
thought I, is a parable. We ask full often, however it comes to pass that in 
this age of progress, when all things seem to be in action, John Bull suffers 
himself to be duped by priests both Romish and Anglican. It is easy to see that 
there is a ring in his nose, or he would never be led by the nose so readily. 
That ring is ignorance. Schools, especially Sabbath schools, are the best means 
of removing that ring. Catechize the children, let the whole population be 
taught; especially let the gospel be brought to bear on the rising generation, 
and by God's grace John Bull will be free, and his first effort will be to toss 
the priests and make them fly aloft like Sancho Panza in the blanket.  
 


## Scoffer: Silenced


'A minister of the Presbyterian Church, in America, delivered a series of 
discourses against Infidelity, in a town in Louisiana, on the Red River, some 
of the citizens of which were known to be skeptical. A few days afterwards he 
took passage in a steamer ascending the Mississippi, and found on board several 
of the citizens of that town, among whom was a disciple of Tom Paine, noted as 
the ringleader of a band of infidels. So soon as he discovered the minister, he 
commenced his horrid blasphemies; and when he perceived him reading at one of 
the tables, he proposed to his companions to go with him to the opposite side 
of the table and listen to some stories that he had to tell upon religion and 
religious men which he said would annoy the old preacher. Quite a number, 
prompted by curiosity, gathered around him to listen to his vulgar stories and 
anecdotes, all of which were pointed against the Bible and its ministers. The 
preacher did not raise his eyes from the book which he was reading, nor appear 
to be in the least disconcerted by the presence of the rabble. At length the 
infidel walked up to him, and rudely slapping him on the shoulder, said, 'Old 
fellow, what do you think of these things?' He calmly pointed out of the door, 
and said, 'Do you see that beautiful landscape spread out in such quiet 
loveliness before you?' 'Yes.' 'It has a variety of flowers, plants, and 
shrubs, that are calculated to fill the beholder with delight.' 'Yes.' 'Well, 
if 
you were to send out a dove, he would pass over that scene and see in it all 
that was beautiful and lovely, and delight himself in gazing at and admiring 
it; 
but if you were to send out a buzzard over precisely the same scene, he would 
see in it nothing to fix his attention, unless he could find some rotten 
carcass 
that would be loathsome to all other animals, in which case he would alight and 
gloat upon it with exquisite pleasure.' 'Do you mean to compare me to a 
buzzard, 
sir,' said the infidel, colouring very deeply. 'I made no allusion to you, 
sir,' 
said the minister, very quietly. The infidel walked off in confusion, and went 
by the name of 'The Buzzard' during the remainder of the passage.'  
 


## Scripture: versus System


The late William Jay, in his 'Practical Illustrations of Character,' says, 
'What a difference must a Christian and a minister feel, between the trammels 
of 
some systems of divinity and the advantage of Scripture freedom, the glorious 
liberty of the sons of God. The one is the horse standing in the street in 
harness, feeding indeed, but on the contents of a bag tossed up and down; the 
other, the same animal in a large, fine meadow, where he lies down in green 
pastures, and feeds beside the still waters.  
 


## Scriptures: and Mens Books


There is gold in the rocks which fringe the Pass of the Splugen, gold even in 
the stones which mend the roads, but there is too little of it to be worth 
extracting. Alas, how like too many books and sermons! Not so the Scriptures, 
they are much fine gold; their very dust is precious.  
 


## Scriptures: Reading of


Lord Bacon tells of a certain bishop who used to bathe regularly twice every 
day, and on being asked why he bathed thus often, replied, 'Because I cannot 
conveniently do it three times.' If those who love the Scriptures were asked 
why they read the Bible so often, they might honestly reply, 'because we cannot 
find time to read it oftener.' The appetite for the Word grows on that which it 
feeds on. We would say with Thomas a Kempis, 'I would be always in a nook with 
a book.'  
 


## Self-Conceit: Its Danger


Quinctilian said of some in his time that they might have become excellent 
scholars had they not been so persuaded of their scholarship already. Grant, 
most gracious God, that I may never hold so high an opinion of my own spiritual 
health as to prevent my being in very deed full of thy grace and fear!  
 


## Self-Dissatisfaction: a Spur


'During the nine years that I was his wife,' says the widow of the great artist 
Opie, 'I never saw him satisfied with one of his productions, and often, very 
often, have I seen him enter my sitting-room, and throwing himself in an agony 
of despondence on the sofa, exclaim, 'I never, never shall be a painter as long 
as I live!' It was a noble despair, such as is never felt by the 
self-complacent daubers of signboards, and it bore the panting aspirant up to 
one of the highest niches in the artistic annals of his country. The selfsame 
dissatisfaction with present attainments is a potent force to bear the 
Christian 
onward to' the most eminent degree of spirituality and holiness.  
 


## Self-Examination: Its Right Offices


A highlander who purchased a barometer under a mistaken idea of its purpose, 
complained that he could not see that it had made any improvement in the 
weather; and those who use signs and evidences for an intent which they will 
never answer, will be sure to complain that their faith is not increased, 
though they are always practising self-examination. Yet a barometer has its 
uses, and so have evidences of grace. To feel the pulse is an admirable thing; 
the mistake is to put this in the place of strengthening food or tonic 
medicine. 
 
 


## Self-Righteousness: Destroyed by Conviction of Sin


The squirrel in his wire cage continually in motion but making no progress, 
reminds me of my own self-righteous efforts after salvation, but the little 
creature is never one half so wearied by his exertions as I was by mine. The 
poor chiffonier in Paris trying to earn a living by picking dirty rags out of 
the kennel, succeeds far better than I did in my attempts to obtain comfort by 
my own works. Dickens's cab-horse, which was only able to stand because it was 
never taken out of the shafts, was strength and beauty itself compared with my 
starveling hopes propped up with resolutions and regulations. Wretches 
condemned to the galleys in the days of the old French kings, whose only reward 
for incessant toils was the lash of the keeper, were in a more happy plight 
than 
I when under legal bondage. Slavery in mines where the sun never shines must be 
preferable to the miseries of a soul goaded by an awakened conscience to seek 
salvation by its own merits. Some of the martyrs were shut up in a dungeon 
called Little-ease; the counterpart of that prison- house I well remember. Iron 
chains are painful enough, but what is the pain when the iron enters into the 
soul! Tell us not of the writhings of the wounded and dying on the battlefield; 
some of us, when our heart was riddled by the artillery of the law, would have 
counted wounds and death a happy exchange. O blessed Saviour, how blissful was 
the hour when all this horrid midnight of the soul was changed into the 
day-dawn of pardoning love!  
 


## Self-Righteousness: Ruin of Many


'A gentleman in our late civil wars,' says Cowley, 'when his quarters were 
beaten up by the enemy, was taken prisoner, and lost his life afterwards, only 
by staying to put on a band, and adjust his periwig: he would escape like a 
person of quality, or not at all, and died the noble martyr of ceremony and 
gentility.' Poor fool, and yet he is as bad who waits till he is dressed in the 
rags of his own fancied fitness before he will come to Jesus. He will die a 
martyr to pride and self-righteousness.  
 


## Self-Righteousness: Vanity of


When the lofty spire of Old St. Paul's was destroyed by lightning, there were 
many superstitious persons who were amazed beyond measure at the calamity, for 
in the cross there had long been deposited relics of certain saints, which were 
counted fully sufficient to avert all danger of tempests. With what amazement 
will ignorant, self-righteous sinners see their own destruction come upon them, 
notwithstanding all the refuges of lies in which they trusted.  
 


## Self-Seeking


A certain king had a minstrel whom he commanded to play before him. It was a 
day of high feasting; the cups were flowing and many great guests were 
assembled. The minstrel laid his fingers among the strings of his harp, and 
woke 
them all to the sweetest melody, but the hymn was to the glory of himself. It 
was a celebration of the exploits of song which the bard had himself performed, 
and told how he had excelled high-born Hoel's harp, and emuted soft Llewellyn's 
lay. In high-sounding strains he sang himself and all his glories. When the 
feast was over, the harper said to the monarch, 'O king, give me thy guerdon; 
let the minstrel's mede be paid.' Then the monarch replied, 'Thou hast sung 
unto thyself, pay thyself; thine own praises were thy theme; be thyself the 
paymaster.' The harper cried, 'Did I not sing sweetly? O king, give me thy 
gold!' But the king answered, 'So much the worse for thy pride, that thou 
shouldst lavish such sweetness upon thyself. Get thee gone, thou shalt not 
serve in my train.' 
If a man should grow grey-headed in the performance of good works, yet when at 
the last it is known that he has done them all for himself, that he may be 
honoured thereby, his Lord will say, 'Thou hast done well enough in the eyes of 
man, but so much the worse, because thou didst it only to thyself, that thine 
own praises might be sung, and that thine own name might be extolled.'  
 


## Self: Watchfulness over


An old writer, speaking of men as stewards of God, urges upon them as wise 
traders and servants to look to themselves carefully, and take care of four 
houses which are under their charge. 1. Their warehouse, or heart and memory, 
wherein they should store up precious things, holy affections, grateful 
remembrances, celestial preparations, etc. Without a good stock in the 
warehouse there can be no good trade. 2. Their workhouse, or their actions, 
wherein they retail to others for God's glory the grace entrusted to them; 
teaching the ignorant, comforting the poor, visiting the sick, eta. We must be 
active, or we cannot be acceptable servants. 3. Their clock-house, meaning 
their 
speech, which must always, like a well-timed bell, speak the truth accurately; 
and meaning also their observance of time, redeeming it by promptly doing the 
duties of every hour. We must use time well, or our spiritual gains will be 
small. 4. Their counting-house, or their conscience, which is to be 
scrupulously 
watched, and no false reckonings allowed, lest we deceive our own souls. The 
Master will call for our accounts, let us keep them honestly.  
 


## Sermons: Bad Not to Be Listened to


Some sermons are not to be listened to at all, just as some meats are not to be 
eaten. Against the siren's song the only safety was deaf ears. Only a gross 
simpleton would leap into a pit full of rattlesnakes to see if they would do 
him any harm; a wise man is content to leave the experiment untried. Despite 
the usual fashion of this age, which runs greedily after cleverness even when 
associated with the most poisonous sentiments, we affirm that it is a 
participation in other men's sins to assist in furnishing an auditory for 
deceivers. Mere talent ought not to attract us; carrion, well dressed and 
served upon Palissy ware, is still unfit for men. Who thrusts his arm into the 
fire because its flame is brilliant? Who knowingly drinks from a poisoned cup 
because the beaded bubbles on the brim reflect the colours of the rainbow? As 
we 
would not be fascinated by the azure hues of a serpent, so neither should we be 
thrown off our guard by the talents of an unsound theologian. To hear or read 
sufficiently to judge, is allowable to the man who, by reason of use, has had 
his senses exercised to discern, and whose business it is to warn others; but 
where error is manifest upon the surface, to expose our minds to its pernicious 
influence is as great a madness as to test the strength of the fever by lying 
in its lair. Godly, scriptural teaching is surely not so rare that we need go 
down to Egypt for help; there are streams enough in Israel without our drinking 
of the polluted water of Sihor.  
 


## Sermons: Brilliant but Useless


Sir Astley Cooper, on visiting Paris, was asked by the surgeon en chef of the 
empire how many times he had performed a certain wonderful feat of surgery. He 
replied that he had performed the operation thirteen times. 'Ah, but, monsieur, 
I have done him one hundred and sixty time. How many times did you save his 
life?' continued the curious Frenchman, after he had looked into the blank 
amazement of Sir Astley's face. 'I,' said the Englishman, 'saved eleven out of 
the thirteen. How many did you save out of one hundred and sixty?' 'Ah, 
monsieur, I lose dem all; but de operation was very brilliant.'  
Of how many popular ministries might the same verdict be given! Souls are not 
saved, but the preaching is very brilliant. Thousands are attracted and 
operated on by the rhetorician's art, but what if he should have to say of his 
admirers, 'I lose them all, but the sermons were very brilliant!'  
 


## Sermons: Must Be Full of Christ


'I have had to interline your sermon all through and through with the name of 
Christ,' was the criticism which an aged parishioner once passed upon the 
discourse of a young pastor. Said the lamented M'Cheyne, 'Some speculate on 
doctrines about the gospel, rather than preach the gospel itself.' 'I see a man 
cannot be a faithful minister, until he preaches Christ for Christ's sake.': 
Christian Treasury.  
 


## Sermons: Must Have the Gospel in Them


A friend called on the Rev. T. Charles, of Bala, on Sunday afternoon, September 
II, 1814, after having been in church. 'Well,' said he, 'how did you like Mr. M 
? Was there enough of gospel in the sermon to save a sinner? If not, it was of 
little consequence what was preached. I hope Bala people will never take up 
with anything short of that.'  
 


## Servants GodìS: Their Ruling Motive


You cannot serve two masters: you must serve one or other. If your work is 
first with you, and your fee second, work is your master, and the Lord of work, 
who is God. But if your fee is first with you, and your work second, fee is 
your master, and the lord of fee, who is the devil; and not only the devil, but 
the lowest of devils: ' the least erected fiend that fell.' So there you have 
it 
in brief terms: work first, you are God's servants; fee first, you are the 
fiend's. And it makes a difference, now and ever, believe me, whether you serve 
him who has on his vesture and thigh written, 'King of kings,' and whose 
service 
is perfect freedom; or him on whose vesture and thigh the name is written, 
'Slave of slaves,' and whose service is perfect slavery.: John Ruskin.  
 


## Service of God: the Honour of


Of the old hero the minstrel sang:  
'With his Yemen sword for aid; 
Ornament it carried none, 
But the notches on the blade.'  
What nobler decoration of honour can any godly man seek after than his scars of 
service, his losses for the cross, his reproaches for Christ's sake, his being 
worn out in his Master's service!  
 


## Service of God: to Be Constant


Look at yon miller on the village hill. How does he grind his grist? Does he 
bargain that he will only grind in the west wind, because its gales are so full 
of health? No, but the east wind, which searches joints and marrow, makes the 
millstones revolve, and together with the north and the south it is yoked to 
his service. Even so should it be with you who are true workers for God; all 
your ups and your downs, your successes and your defeats, should be turned to 
the glory of God.  
 


## Service: Christian to Be Ever Ready for


Brutus visiting Ligarius found him ill, and said, 'What, sick, Ligarius?' 'No, 
Brutus,' said he, 'if thou hast any noble enterprise in hand, I am well.' So 
should the believer say of Christ; what might excuse us from other labour shall 
never prevent our engaging in his service.  
 


## Service: Preparations for


'Methought I looked and saw the Master standing, and at his feet lay an earthen 
vessel. It was not broken, not unfitted for service, yet there it lay, 
powerless and useless, until he took it up. He held it awhile, and I saw that 
he 
was filling it, and anon, I beheld him walking in his garden, whither he had 
'gone down to gather lilies.' The earthen vessel was yet again in his hand, and 
with it he watered his beauteous plants, and caused their odours to be shed 
forth yet more abundantly. Then I said to myself, 'Sorrowing Christian, hush! 
hush! peace, be still! thou art this earthen vessel; powerless, it is true, yet 
not broken, still fit for the Master's use. Sometimes thou mayst be laid aside 
altogether from active service, and the question may arise, what is the Master 
doing with me now? Then may a voice speak to thine inmost heart, 'he is filling 
the vessel, yes, only filling it ready for use.' Dost thou ask in what manner? 
Nay, be silent. Is it not all too great an honour for thee to be used by him at 
all? Be content, whether thou art employed in watering the lilies, or in 
washing 
the feet of the saints.' Truly, it is a matter of small moment. Enough, surely 
enough, for an earthen vessel to be in the Master's hands, and employed in the 
Master's service.'  


## Service: the Road to Honour


When the Spartan king advanced against the enemy, he had always with him some 
one that had been crowned in the public games of Greece. And they tell us, that 
a Lacedonian, when large sums were offered him on condition that he would not 
enter the Olympic lists, refused them. Having with much difficulty thrown his 
antagonists in wrestling, one put this question to him, 'Spartan, what will you 
get by this victory?' He answered with a smile, 'I shall have the honour to 
fight foremost in the ranks of my prince.' The honour which appertains to 
office in the church of God lies mainly in this: that the man who is set apart 
for such service has the privilege of being first in holiness of example, 
abundance of liberality, patience of longsuffering, zeal in effort, and 
self-sacrifice in service. Thou gracious King of kings, if thou hast made me a 
minister or deacon in thy church, enable me to be foremost in every good word 
and work, shunning no sacrifice, and shrinking from no suffering  
 


## Serving God: the Sure Reward of


When Calvin was banished from ungrateful Geneva, he said, 'Most assuredly if I 
had merely served man, this would have been a poor recompense; but it is my 
happiness that I have served him who never fails to reward his servants to the 
full extent of his promise.'  
 


## Shams


What multitudes of mahogany-handled drawers there are to be met with in daily 
life labelled in black on a gold ground, with swelling and mysterious names of 
precious healing drugs; but, alas! they are handles which do not pull out, or 
drawers that are full of nothing. What myriads of empty bottles make up yonder 
enormous stock in the Universal Emporium so largely advertised! What a noble 
army of canisters filled with air stand marshalled in shining ranks, as if they 
were fresh from China, and brimming with the fragrant leaf! Now in mere 
business such things may answer well enough; but bring them into your moral 
dealings, and you shall soon become contemptible. One smiles at the busy 
tradesman arranging the shams in his window, but we are indignant with men who 
exhibit unreal virtues and excellences; he thinks that he makes a fair show in 
the flesh, but when we have found him out once, even what may be genuine in him 
is subjected to suspicion, and the man's honour is hopelessly gone.  
 


## Sin


Those who give themselves up to the service of sin, enter the palace of 
pleasure by wide portals of marble, which conceal the low wicket behind which 
leads into the fields, where they are in a short time sent to feed swine.: 
James 
D. Burns.  
 


## Sin (2)


One danger of secret sin is that a man cannot commit it without being by-and-by 
betrayed into a public sin. If a man commit one sin, it is like the melting of 
the lower glacier upon the Alps, the others must follow in time. As certainly 
as you heap one stone upon the cairn to-day, the next day you will cast 
another, until the heap reared stone by stone shall become a very pyramid. See 
the coral insect at work, you cannot decree where it shall stay its pile. It 
will not build its rock as high as you please; it will not stay until an island 
shall be created. Sin cannot be held in with bit and bridle, it must be 
mortified.  
 


## Sin: Aroused by the Law


A contended citizen of Milan, who had never passed beyond its walls during the 
course of sixty years, being ordered by the governor not to stir beyond its 
gates, became immediately miserable, and felt so powerful an inclination to do 
that which he had so. long contentedly neglected, that on his application for a 
release from this restraint being refused, he became quite melancholy, and at 
last died of grief. How well this illustrates the apostle's confession that he 
shad not known lust, unless the law had said unto him, 'Thou shalt not covet!' 
'Sin,' saith he, 'taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner 
of concupiscence.' Evil often sleeps in the soul, until the holy command of God 
is discovered, and then the enmity of the carnal mind rouses itself to oppose 
in every way the will of God. 'Without the law,' says Paul, 'sin was dead.' How 
vain to hope for salvation from the law, when through the perversity of sin, it 
provokes our evil hearts to rebellion, and works in us neither repentance nor 
love.  
 


## Sin: How to Overcome


Sin is to be overcome, not so much by maintaining a direct opposition to it, as 
by cultivating opposite principles. Would you kill the weeds in your garden, 
plant it with good seed: if the ground be well occupied there will be less need 
of the labour of the hoe. If a man wished to quench fire, he might fight it 
with his hands till he was burnt to death; the only way is to apply an opposite 
element.: Andrew Fuller.  
 


## Sin: Insidious Nature of


In the gardens of Hampton Court you will see many trees entirely vanquished and 
well nigh strangled by huge coils of ivy, which are wound about them like the 
snakes around the unhappy Laocoon: there is no untwisting the folds, they are 
too giant-like, and fast fixed, and every hour the rootlets of the climber are 
sucking the life out of the unhappy tree. Yet there was a day when the ivy was 
a tiny aspirant, only asking a little aid in climbing; had it been denied then, 
the tree had never become its victim, but by degrees the humble weak-S ling 
grew in strength and arrogance, and at last it assumed the mastery, and the 
tall 
tree became the prey of the creeping, insinuating destroyer. The moral is too 
obvious. Sorrowfully do we remember many noble characters which have been 
ruined little and little by insinuating habits. Drink has been the ivy in many 
cases. Reader, see to it, lest some slowly advancing sin overpower you: men who 
are murdered by slow poisoning die just as surely as those who take arsenic.  
 


## Sin: Its Encroaching Nature


When a sin is let in as a suppliant, it remains in as a tyrant. The Arabs have 
a fable of a miller who one day was startled by a camel's nose thrust in the 
window of the room where he was sleeping. 'It is very cold outside,' said the 
camel, 'I only want to get my nose in.' The nose was let in, then the neck, and 
finally the whole body. Presently the miller began to be extremely 
inconvenienced at the ungainly companion he had obtained in a room certainly 
not big enough for both. 'If you are inconvenienced you may leave,' said the 
camel; 'as for myself, I shall stay where I am.' There are many such camels 
knocking at the human heart. Take, for instance, compliance with a single 
worldly custom: dancing. First, the custom creeps humbly to the door of the 
heart, and says, 'Let me in; what am I but putting one foot before another? 
certainly you do not object to music, and I would not for the world have a full 
band.' So in comes the nose of the camel, and it is not long before the entire 
body follows. The Christian then finds his heart occupied in full figure by the 
very vice which a little while before peeped in so meekly. 'Being up,' it says 
to him, 'all night at a ball, with the eyes dazzled by lights, and the ears 
stunned with a full band, interferes, you say, with your private devotions. So 
it does. But your private devotions will have to go, for I will not.': 
Episcopal 
Recorder.  
 


## Sin: Its Hardening Effects


Dr. Preston tells us of a professor who on one occasion was found drunk, and 
when much depressed on account of his folly, the devil said to him, by way of 
temptation, 'Do it again, do it again; for,' said he, 'the grief you feel about 
it now you will never feel any more if you commit the sin again.' Dr. Preston 
says that the man yielded to the temptation, and from that time he never did 
feel the slightest regret at his drunkenness, and lived and died a confirmed 
sot, though formerly he had been a very high professor.  
 


## Sin: Its Wide Consequences


Sages of old contended that no sin was ever committed whose consequences rested 
on the head of the sinner alone; that no man could do ill and his fellows not 
suffer. They illustrated it thus:: 'A vessel sailing from Joppa, carried a 
passenger, who, beneath his berth, cut a hole through the ship's side. When the 
men of the watch expostulated with him, 'What doest thou, O miserable man?' the 
offender calmly replied, 'What matters it to you? The hole I have made lies 
under my own berth.'  
This ancient parable is worthy of the utmost consideration. No man perishes 
alone in his iniquity; no man can guess the full consequences of his 
transgressions.  
 


## Sin: Loathed by a Christian


An Arminian arguing with a Calvinist remarked, 'If I believed your doctrine, 
and were sure that I was a converted man, I would take my fill of sin.' 'How 
much sin,' replied the godly Calvinist, 'do you think it would take to fill a 
true Christian to his own satisfaction?' Here he hit the nail on the head. 'How 
can we that are dead to sin live any longer therein?' A truly converted man 
hates sin with all his heart, and even if he could sin without suffering for 
it, 
it would be misery enough to him to sin at all.  
 


## Sin: Mans Readiness to Invent Excuse for


A Traveller in Venezuela illustrates the readiness of men to lay their faults 
on the locality, or on anything rather than themselves, by the story of a hard 
drinker who came home one night in such a condition that he could not for some 
time find his hammock. When this feat was accomplished, he tried in vain to get 
off his big riding-boots. After many fruitless efforts he lay down in his 
hammock, and soliloquized aloud, 'Well, I have travelled all the world over; I 
lived five years in Cuba, four in Jamaica, five in Brazil, I have travelled 
through Spain and Portugal, and been in Africa, but I never yet was in such an 
abominable country as this, where a man is obliged to go to bed with his boots 
on.'  
Commonly enough are we told by evildoers in excuse for their sins that no man 
could do otherwise were he in their position, that there is no living at their 
trade honestly, that in such a street shops must be open on a Sunday, that 
their health required an excursion to Brighton on the Sabbath because their 
labours were so severe, that nobody could be religious in the house in which 
they were engaged, and so on, all to the same effect, and about as truthful as 
the soliloquy of the drunkard of Venezuela.  
 


## Sin: May Be Committed by Proxy


According to an old writer, no Capuchin among the Papists may take or touch 
silver. This metal is as great an anathema to them as the wedge of gold to 
Achan, at the offer whereof they start back as Moses from the serpent; yet the 
monk has a boy behind him who will receive and carry home any quantity, and 
neither complain of metal nor measure. Such are those who are great sticklers 
themselves for outward observance in religion, but at the same time compel 
their servants to sin on their account. They who sin by substitute shall be 
damned in person.  
 


## Sin: One the Souls Ruin


There was but one crack in the lanthorn, and the wind has found it out and 
blown out the candle. How great a mischief one unguarded point of character may 
cause us! One spark blew up the magazine and shook the whole country for miles 
around. One leak sank the vessel and drowned all on board. One wound may kill 
the body; one sin destroy the soul.  
 


## Sin: One the Souls Ruin (2)


While I was walking in the garden one bright morning, a breeze came through and 
set all the flowers and leaves a fluttering. Now that is the way flowers talk, 
so I pricked up my ears and listened.  
Presently, an old elder tree said, Flowers, shake off your caterpillars!'  
'Why?' said a dozen altogether: for they were like some children, who always 
say 'Why,' when they are told to do anything: bad children those!  
The elder said, 'If you don't, they'll eat you up alive.'  
So the flowers set themselves a shaking till the caterpillars were shaken off.  
In one of the middle beds there was a beautiful rose, who shook off all but 
one, and she said to herself 'Oh, that's a beauty! I'll keep that one.'  
The elder overheard her, and called out, 'One caterpillar is enough to spoil 
you.' 
 'But,' said the rose, 'look at his brown and crimson fur, and his beautiful 
black eyes, and scores of little feet; I want to keep him; surely one won't 
hurt me.' 
A few mornings after, I passed the rose again; there was not a whole leaf on 
her; her beauty was gone; she was all but killed, and had only life enough to 
weep over her folly, while the tears stood like dew-drops on her tattered 
leaves.  
'Alas! I didn't think one caterpillar would ruin me.': C. A. Davis.  
 


## Sin: Power over the Unregenerate


So long as a man is dead in trespasses and sin, there is no iniquity which may 
not get the mastery of him. Where the body is, thither will the vultures of 
hell be gathered together. The devil finding him dead, calls up his hosts of 
temptations and his bands of evils to feed on him. The great destroyer, who at 
other times is as a lion, often plays the part of a jackal, whose cry, when it 
finds its prey, is said to sound exactly like the words:  
'Dead Hind, dead Hind! 
Where, where, where, where? 
Here, here, here, here!'  
Nothing but the new life can secure a man from the worst fiends in the 
Pandemonium of vice, for they gather like a scattered pack to a feast when they 
hear their master cry: Dead sinner, dead sinner!  
Where, where, where, where!
Here, here, here, here!  
Vices seldom come alone; where there is room for one devil, seven other spirits 
more wicked than himself will find a lodging. We may say of sins as Longfellow 
of birds of prey, in his song of Hiawatha  
'Never stoops the soaring vulture 
On his quarry in the desert,  On the sick or wounded bison, 
But another vulture watching, 
From his high aerial look-out 
Sees the downward plunge and follows; 
And a third pursues the second, 
Coming from the invisible ether, 
First a speck, and then a vulture 
Till the air is dark with pinions.'  
 


## Sin: Punishment of


What a diabolical invention was the 'Virgin's kiss,' once used by the fathers 
of the Inquisition! The victim was pushed forward to kiss the image, when, lo, 
its arms enclosed him in a deadly embrace, piercing his body with a hundred 
hidden knives. The tempting pleasures of sin offer to the unwary just such a 
virgin's kiss. The sinful joys of the flesh lead, even in this world, to 
results 
most terrible, while in the world to come the daggers of remorse and despair 
will cut and wound beyond all remedy.  
 


## Sin: the Toil of It


Henry Ward Beecher says, 'There was a man in the town where I was born who used 
to steal all his firewood. He would get up on cold nights and go and take it 
from his neighbours' wood-piles. A computation was made, and it was ascertained 
that he spent more time and worked harder to get his fuel, than he would have 
been obliged to if he had earned it in an honest way, and at ordinary wages. 
And this thief is a type of thousands of men who work a great deal harder to 
please the devil than they would have to work to please God.'  
 


## Sinners: Madness of


A recent traveller, relating the incidents of his voyage to India, writes:: 
'Flocks of greedy albatrosses, petrels, and Cape -pigeons, crowded around the 
ship's stern. A hook was baited with fat, when upwards of a dozen albatrosses 
instantly rushed at it, and as one after another was being hauled on deck, the 
remainder, regardless of the struggles of the captured, and the vociferations 
of the crew, kept swimming about the stern. Not even did those birds which were 
indifferently hooked and made their escape, desist from seizing the bait a 
second time.' Thus to the letter do ungodly men rush at the baits of Satan; 
they see others perish, but remain careless, and even when they are all but 
destroyed themselves they persist in their infatuation.  
 


## Sinners: Their Company to Be Avoided


When a man is known to suffer from a sadly contagious disease, none of his 
friends will come near the house. There is little need to warn them off, they 
are all too alarmed to come near, Why is it men are not as much afraid of the 
contagion of vice? How dare they run risks for themselves and children by 
allowing evil companions to frequent their house? Sin is as infectious and far 
more deadly than the small-pox or fever. Flee, then, from every one who might 
lead you into it.  
 


## Sins: Home-Born Our Worst Foes


The old proverb hath it, 'Here's talk of the Turk and the Pope, but 'tis my 
next neighbour that does me the most harm.' It is neither popery nor infidelity 
that we have half so much cause to dread as our own besetting sins. We want 
more Protestants against sin, more Dissenters from carnal maxims, and more 
Nonconformists to the world. Our own besetting sins require far more of our 
watchfulness than State blunders or ecclesiastical abuses.  
 


## Sins: How Men Treat Them


What swarms of rabbits the traveller sees on the commons and fields near 
Leatherhead (in Surrey), and yet a few miles further on at Wootton one scarcely 
sees a single specimen of that prolific race. The creature is indigenous to 
both places, but at Leatherhead he is tolerated and therefore multiplies, while 
at the other places the gamekeepers diligently shoot down all they see. Sins 
are natural to all men, but it makes all the difference whether they are 
fostered or kept under; the carnal mind makes itself a warren for evil, but a 
gracious spirit wages constant war with every transgression.  
 


## Sins: the Most Attractive the Most Deadly


It is notable that nearly all the poisonous fungi are scarlet or speckled, and 
the wholesome ones brown or grey, as if to show us that things rising out of 
darkness and decay are always most deadly when they are well dressed.: Ruskin.  
 


## Slander


We saw in the Museum at Venice an instrument with which one of the old Italian 
tyrants was accustomed to shoot poisoned needles at the objects of his wanton 
malignity: we thought of gossips, backbiters, and secret slanderers, and wished 
that their mischievous devices might come to a speedy end. Their weapons of 
innuendo, shrug, and whisper, appear to be as insignificant as needles, but the 
venom which they instil is deadly to many a reputation.  
 


## Slander: How to Overcome It


Some person reported to the amiable poet Tasso that a malicious enemy spoke ill 
of him to all the world. 'Let him persevere,' said Tasso, 'his rancour gives me 
no pain. How much better is it that he should speak ill of me to all the world, 
than that all the world should speak ill of me to him.'  
 


## Slander: Rebuked


The Rev. B. Jacobs, of Cambridgeport, could, when necessary, administer reproof 
very forcibly, though the gentleness of his character was always seen in the 
manner in which it was done. Some young ladies at his house were one day 
talking about one of their female friends. As he entered the room, he heard the 
epithets 'odd,' 'singular,' &c., applied. He asked and was told the name of the 
young lady in question, and then said, very gravely, 'Yes, she is an odd young 
lady; she is a very odd young lady; I consider her extremely singular.' He then 
added very impressively,' She was never heard to speak ill of an absent 
friend.' 
The rebuke was not forgotten by those who heard it.  
 


## Slander: to Be Despised


One of our ancient nobility had inscribed over his castle gate these words, 
which we commend to all persons who are thin-skinned in the matter of private 
gossip or public opinion.  
THEY SAY. 
WHAT DO THEY SAY? 
LET THEM SAY.  
 


## Smooth Places: Peril of


After crossing the Grimsel, on the way down towards Handeck, the traveller 
traverses a road cut in red marble, so smoothly polished that, even when it is 
divested of its usual thin coating of snow, it is dangerous in the extreme. 
Notwithstanding that steps are hewn, and rough marks made across the granite, 
he would be foolhardy who should try to ride along the slippery way, which is 
called Helle Platte, or Hell Place, for reasons which glisten on its surface. 
'Dismount,' is the word, and none are slow to obey it. There are many such Hell 
Places on the road to the celestial city: smooth places of pleasure, ease, 
flattery, self-content, and the like; and it will be the wisest course if any 
pilgrim has been fond of riding the high horse, for him to dismount at once and 
walk humbly with his God. That enchanted ground of which Bunyan tells us that 
the air naturally tended to make one drowsy, is just the spot to which we 
refer; men had need be watchful whose path lies through that deceitful country. 
 
It has been said that in a calm sea every man is a pilot, but we take leave to 
doubt it; calms have dangers quite unknown to storms, and rocks and quicksands 
are none the less perilous because the deceitful sea which covers them smiles 
softly on the mariner. Not to be tempted is a great temptation. Safety breeds 
carelessness, and carelessness is the mother of ruin. When Mansoul was at 
peace, Mr. Carnal-security invited her citizens to his fatal feasts, and the 
Prince Immanuel withdrew himself; let the result warn us against a repetition 
of 
the evil.  
 


## So:  God So Loved Etc


Plimy declares that Cicero once saw the Iliad of Homer written in so small a 
character that it could be contained in a nutshell. Peter Bales a celebrated 
caligrapher, in the days of Queen Elizabeth, wrote the whole Bible so that it 
was shut up in a common walnut as its casket. In these days of advanced 
mechanism even greater marvels in miniature have been achieved, but never has 
so much meaning been compressed into so small a space as in that famous little 
word 'So,' in the text which tells us that 'God so loved the world, that he 
gave 
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but 
have everlasting life.'  
 


## Sorrow: Benefit of


Two seeds lie before us: the one is warmed in the sun, the other falls from the 
sower's hand into the cold dark earth, and there it lies buried beneath the 
soil. That seed which suns itself in the noontide beam may rejoice in the light 
in which it basks, but it is liable to be devoured by the bird; and certainly 
nought can come of it, however long it may linger above ground; but the other 
seed, hidden beneath the clods in a damp, dark sepulchre, soon swells, 
germinates, bursts its sheath, upheaves the mould, springs up a green blade, 
buds, blossoms, becomes a flower, exhales perfume, and loads the wings of every 
wind. Better far for the seed to pass intO the earth and die, than to lie in 
the sunshine and produce no fruit; and even thus for thee the future in its 
sorrow shall be as a sowing in a fertile land; tears shall moisten thee, grace 
shall increase within tjee, and thou shalt grow up in the likeness of thy Lord 
unto perfection of holiness, to be such a flower of God's own planting as even 
angels shall delight to gaze upon in the day of thy transplanting to celestial 
soil.  
 


## Sorrow: for Sin Absorbing


When that famous statesman Mirabeau died, all France bewailed his loss, and men 
for some hours could think or speak of little else. A waiter in one of the 
Restaurants of the Palais Royal, after the manner of his race, saluted a 
customer with the usual remark, 'Fine weather, Monsieur.'  
'Yes, my friend,' replied the other, 'very fine; but Mirabeau is dead.'  
If one absorbing thought can thus take precedence of every other in the affairs 
of life, is it so very wonderful that men aroused to care for the life to come 
should be altogether swallowed up with grief at the dread discovery that they 
are by reason of sin condemned of God? Fine or foul may the weather be, but if 
the soul be under the wrath of God its woeful condition will make it careless 
of surroundings. If his former security be dead, and the fear of coming 
judgment 
be alive in the man's heart, it is little wonder if eating and drinking be 
forgotten, if sleep forsake his eyelids and even household joys become insipid. 
Let but the one emotion be great enough, and it will push out every other. The 
bitterness of spiritual grief will destroy both the honey of earthly bliss and 
the quassia of bodily pain.  
 


## Sorrows: Leading to Conversion


Augustine says that his God was 'mercifully rigorous' to him, besprinkling with 
most bitter alloy all his unlawful pleasures, 'that he might seek pleasures 
without alloy.'  
 


## Soul: Needing Something to Cling to


The soul of man is a clasping, clinging soul, seeking to something over which 
it can spread itself, and by means of which it can support itself. And just as 
in a neglected garden you may see the poor creepers making shift to sustain 
themselves as best they can; one convolvulus twisting round another, and both 
draggling on the ground; a clematis leaning on the door, which will by-and-by 
open and let the whole mass fall down; a vine or a passion-flower wreathing 
round a prop which all the while chafes and cuts it; so in this fallen world it 
is mournful to see the efforts which human souls are making to get some 
sufficient object to lean upon and twine around.: James Hamilton, D.D.  


## Souls: Care for


In Switzerland, where land is very precious because rock abounds and the rugged 
soil is chary in its yieldings, you see the husbandman looking after a little 
tuft of grass growing on one of the edges of a lofty cliff. From the valley he 
had caught a sight of it and thought of clambering up to where it grew, but the 
rock was all too steep. From a ledge nearer the top of the precipitous wall he 
looked down, but could see no pathway to the coveted morsel of green. That 
armful of grass would feed his goat, or help to fill the cottage loft with 
winter fodder for the cow. Every armful is an item, and he cannot forego that 
tempting clump. He looks, and looks, and looks again, but looks in vain. 
By-and-by, he fetches his bold boy who can follow wherever a chamois can climb, 
but the boy after a hard scramble comes back with the tidings, 'Father, it 
cannot be done.' Father's answer is, 'Boy, it must be done.' It is only an 
armful, and would not be worth a farthing to us, but to the poor mountaineer 
even a farthing or a farthing's worth is precious. The grass waves its flowers 
in the breeze and scorns the daring climbers from below; but where there is a 
will, there is a way; and what cannot be reached from below may be gained from 
above. With a rope slung round him, or firmly grasped in his accustomed hand, 
with a stout stake or tree to hold it up above, the Switzer is let down till he 
gets to the jutting crag, there he stands with his sickle, reaps the grass, 
ties it into a bundle, puts it under his arm, and climbing back again, joyfully 
returns with his little harvest. Poor pay, you think, for such dangerous toil; 
but, fellow worker for Jesus, I wish we were as venturesome for souls, and as 
careful of them, as these poor peasants are concerning miserable bundles of 
grass. I wish that we sometimes looked up or down upon apparently inaccessible 
spots, and resolved to reach immortal souls who are to be found there, and 
pined to bring them to Christ.  


## Souls: Love of


Thomas Fuller, in his 'Worthies,' gives the following interesting account of 
one Gervase Scroop, Knight:: 'He engaged with his majesty in Edgehill fight, 
where he received twenty-six wounds, and was left on the ground amongs't the 
dead. Next day his son Adrian obtained leave from the king to find and fetch 
off 
his father's corpse: and his hopes pretended no higher than to a decent 
interment thereof. 
'Hearty seeking makes happy finding. Indeed, some more commended the affection 
than the judgment of the young gentleman, concerning such a search in vain 
amongst many naked bodies, with wounds disguised from themselves, and where 
pale death had confounded all complexions together.  
'However, he having some general hint of the place where his father fell, did 
light upon his body, which had some heat left therein. This heat was, with 
rubbing, within a few minutes, improved into motion; within some hours, into 
sense; that sense, within a day, into speech; that speech, within certain 
weeks, into a perfect recovery; living more than ten years after, a monument of 
God's mercy and his son's affection.'  
True love to souls will seek them out with all the eagerness of this heroic 
son, and, finding them, will be as persevering in attempts to save. Not all at 
once shall we see all we could wish in the objects of our holy care, but no 
difficulties must daunt us; we must continue by God's grace to agonise for 
their souls till we see them safe in Christ. The little awakened interest which 
cheers us must be nursed into anxiety, and through the Holy Spirit we must 
labour to see anxiety turned into' hope, and hope to faith and salvation. None 
are too far gone for zeal and prayer. Love is ever hopeful and God is ever 
gracious. Let us renew our search, and the Lord send us good speed to-day.  
 


## Souls: the Crisis of


Often, when travelling among the Alps, one sees a small black cross planted 
upon a rock, or on the brink of a torrent, or on the verge of the highway, to 
mark the spot where men have met with sudden death by accident. Solemn 
reminders these of our mortality! but they led our mind still further; for we 
said within us, if the places where men seal themselves for the second death 
could be thus manifestly indicated, what a scene would this world present! Here 
the memorial of a soul undone by yielding to a foul temptation, there a 
conscience seared by the rejection of a final warning, and yonder a heart for 
ever turned into stone by resisting the last tender appeal of love. Our places 
of worship would scarce hold the sorrowful monuments which might be erected 
over 
spots where spirits were for ever lost: spirits that date their ruin from 
sinning against the gospel while under the sound of it.  
 


## Speculations: Their Folly


While a minister of my acquaintance was riding in a railway carriage, he was 
saluted by a member of an exceedingly litigious and speculative sect. 'Pray, 
sir,' said the sectary, 'what is your opinion of the 'seven trumpets?' 'I am 
not sure,' said the preacher, 'that I understand your question, but I hope you 
will comprehend mine: What think you of the fact that your seven children are 
growing up without God and without hope? You have a Bible-reading in your house 
for your neighbours, but no 'family prayer for your children.' The nail was 
fastened in a sure place, enough candour of mind remained in the professor to 
enable him to profit by the timely rebuke. It were greatly to be desired that 
Christians who are so much given to speculate upon the prophecies, would turn 
their thoughts and leisure to the perishing myriads by whom we are surrounded, 
and sow in the fields of evangelisation rather than in the cloudland of 
guess-work interpretation.  


## Spirit of God: the Fire from Heaven


Suppose we saw an army sitting down before a granite fort, and they told us 
that they intended to batter it down, we might ask them, 'How!' They point to a 
cannon ball. Well, but there is no power in that; it is heavy, but not more 
than half-a-hundred or perhaps a hundredweight; if all the men in the army 
hurled it against the fort they would make no impression. They say, 'No, but 
look at the cannon!' Well, but there is no power in that. A child may ride upon 
it; a bird may perch in its mouth. It is a machine, and nothing more. 'But look 
at the powder.' Well, there is no power in that; a child may spill it; a 
sparrow 
may peck it. Yet this powerless powder and powerless ball are put in the 
powerless cannon: one spark of fire enters it, and then, in the twinkling of an 
eye, that powder is a Rash of lightning, and that cannon ball is a thunderbolt 
which smites as if it had been sent from heaven.  
So is it with our church or school machinery of this day; we have the 
instruments necessary for pulling down strongholds, but O for the fire from 
heaven!  
 


## Spiritual Warmth: How to Maintain It


Philip Henry's advice to his daughter: 'If you would keep warm in this cold 
season (January, 1692), take these four directions: 1. Get into the sun; under 
his blessed beams there are warmth and comfort. 2. Go near the fire. 'Is not my 
word like a fire?' How many cheering passages are there! 3. Keep in motion and 
action: stirring up the grace and gift of God that is in you. 4. Seek Christian 
communion. 'How can one be warm alone?' 
 


## Sternness


It is said of that eminent saint and martyr, Bishop Hooper, that on one 
occasion a man in deep distress was allowed to go into his prison to tell his 
tale of conscience, but Bishop Hooper looked so sternly upon him, and addressed 
him so severely at first, that the poor soul ran away, and could not get 
comfort 
until he had sought out another minister of a gentler aspect. Hooper really was 
a gracious and loving soul, but the sternness of his manner kept the penitent 
off.  
 


## Submission: to the Divine Will


Payson was asked, when under great bodily affliction, if he could see any 
particular reason for this dispensation. 'No,' replied he, 'but I am as well 
satisfied as if I could see ten thousand; God's will is the very perfection of 
all reason.'  
 


## Suffering: True Service


Old Betty was converted late in life, and though very poor, was very active.. 
She visited the sick; out of her own poverty she gave to those who were still 
poorer; collected a little money from others when she could give none of her 
own, and told many a one of the love of the Saviour. At last she caught cold 
and rheumatism, and lay in bed month after month, pain-worn and helpless. A 
good minister went to see her, and asked, if after her active habits she did 
not 
find the change very hard to bear. 'No, sir, not at all. When I was well, I 
used 
to hear the Lord say day by day, 'Betty, go here; Betty, go there; Betty, do 
this; Betty, do that;' and I used to do it as well as I could; and now I hear 
him say every day, 'Betty, lie still and cough.': James Hamilton, D.D.  
 


## Sympathy: Fruit of Experience


Hone in his 'Year Book,' has the following anecdote of Charles Pratt, Earl 
Camden, when Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. 'Being on a visit to Lord 
Dacre, at Alveley, in Essex, he walked out with a gentleman, a very absent man, 
to a bill, at no great distance from the house, upon the top of which stood the 
stocks of the village. The Chief Justice sat down upon them, and after awhile, 
having a mind to know what the punishment was, he asked his companion to open 
them and put him in. This being done, his friend took a book from his pocket, 
sauntered on, and so completely forgot the judge and his situation that he 
returned to Lord Dacre's. In the meantime, the Chief Justice being tired of the 
stocks, tried in vain to release himself. Seeing a countryman pass by, he 
endeavored to move him to let him out, but obtained nothing by his motion. 'No, 
no, old gentleman,' said the countryman, 'you was not set there for nothing,' 
and left him until he was released by a servant of the house despatched in 
quest of him. Some time after he presided at a trial in which a charge was 
brought against a magistrate for false imprisonment, and for setting in the 
stocks. The counsel for the magistrate in his reply, made light of the whole 
charge, and more especially setting in the stocks, which he said everybody knew 
was no punishment at all. The Chief Justice rose, and, leaning over the bench, 
said, in a half-whisper, 'Brother, have you ever been in the stocks?' 'Really, 
my lord, never.' 'Then I have,' said the judge, 'and I assure you, brother, it 
is no such trifle as you represent.' A little experience of the real trials of 
life, as endured by the poor, the sick, and the desponding, would be of 
essential service to many professors, and especially 'to those religious 
teachers whose path in life has been smooth and prosperous. Nothing promotes 
true sympathy like a kindred experience.  
 


## Sympathy: Only Learned


The story goes that Harry the Eighth wandering one night in the streets of 
London in disguise, was met at the bridge-foot by some of the watch, and not 
giving a good account of himself was carried off to the Poultry Compter, and 
shut up for the night without fire or candle. On his liberation he made a grant 
of thirty caldrons of coals and a quantity of bread for the solace of night 
prisoners in the Compter. Experience brings sympathy. Those who have felt sharp 
afflictions, terrible convictions, racking. doubts and violent temptations, 
will be zealous in consoling those in a similar condition. It were well if the 
great Head of the church would put unsympathising pastors into the Compter of 
trouble for a season until they could weep with those that weep.  
 


## Taste: Spiritual Needful for Earthly Joys


The unfitness of unrenewed souls for heaven, may be illustrated by the 
incapacity of certain uneducated and coarse-minded persons for elevated 
thoughts and intellectual pursuits. When a little child, I lived some years in 
my grandfather's house. In his garden there was a fine old hedge of yew of 
considerable length, which was clipped and trimmed till it made quite a wall of 
verdure. Behind it was a wide grass walk, which looked upon the fields, and 
afforded a quiet outlook. The grass was kept mown, so as to make pleasant 
walking. Here, ever since the old Puritanic chapel was built, godly divines had 
walked, and prayed, and meditated. My grandfather was wont to use it as his 
study. Up and down it he would walk when preparing his sermons, and always on 
Sabbath-days when it was fair, he had half-an- hour there before preaching. To 
me it seemed to be a perfect paradise, and being forbidden to stay there when 
grandfather was meditating, I viewed it with, no small degree of awe. I love to 
think of the green and quiet walk at this moment, and could wish for just such 
a study. But I was once shocked and even horrified by hearing a farming man 
remark concerning this sanctum sanctorum, 'It' ud grow a many 'taturs if it wor 
ploughed up.' What cared he for holy memories? What were meditation and 
contemplation to him? Is it not the chief end of man to grow potatoes and eat 
them? Such, on a larger scale, would be an unconverted man's estimate of joys 
so elevated and refined as those of heaven, could he by any possibility be 
permitted to gaze upon them.  


## Temper: Important


The Adige at Verona appears to be a river quite broad and deep enough for 
navigation, but its current is so rapid as to make it quite unserviceable. Many 
men are so rash, and impetuous, and at the same time so suddenly angry and 
excited, that their otherwise most valuable abilities arc rendered useless for 
any good purpose.  
 


## Temptation


Many horses fall at the bottom of a hill because the driver thinks the danger 
past and the need to hold the reins with firm grip less pressing. So it is 
often with us when we are not specially tempted to overt sin, we are the more 
in danger through slothful ease. I think it was Ralph Erskine who said, 'There 
is no devil so bad as no devil.' The worst temptation that ever overtakes us, 
is, in some respects, preferable to our becoming carnally secure and neglecting 
to watch and pray.  
'More the treacherous calm I dread 
Than tempests rolling overhead.'  
 


## Temptations


Notice the invention used by country people to catch wasps. They will put a 
little sweet liquor into a long and narrow-necked phial. The do-nothing wasp 
comes by, smells the sweet liquor, plunges in and is drowned. But the bee comes 
by, and if she does stop for a moment to smell, yet she enters not, because she 
has honey of her own to make; she is too busy in the work of the commonwealth 
to indulge herself with the tempting sweets. Master Greenham, a Puritan dIvine, 
was once waited upon by a woman who was greatly tempted. Upon making enquiries 
into her way of life, he found she had little to do, and Greenham said, 'That 
is 
the secret of your being so much tempted. Sister, if you are very busy, Satan 
may tempt you, but he will not easily prevail, and he will soon give up the 
attempt.' Idle Christians are not tempted of the devil so much as they tempt 
the devil to tempt them.  
 


## Temptations (2)


One of the ancient fathers, we are told, had, before his conversion, lived with 
an ill woman, and some little time after, she accosted him as usual. Knowing 
how likely he was to fall into sin, he ran away with all his might, and she ran 
after him, crying, 'Wherefore runnest thou away? It is I.' He answered, 'I run 
away because I am not I. I am a new man.'  
 


## Temptations: from Friends to Be Watchfully Resisted


The lady in Millais' famous picture would fain save her lover's life from the 
massacre of Bartholomew, by binding the popish badge around his arm; he kisses 
her for her love, but firmly removes the badge. So when the dearest friends we 
have, out of mistaken tenderness would persuade us to avoid persecution by 
relinquishing principle, and doing as others do, we should thank them for their 
love, but with unbending decision refuse to be numbered with the world. Moses 
must have loved Pharaoh's daughter for her kindness, but he refused to be 
called her son.  
 


## Terror: of Convicted Consciences


In certain places on Alpine summits the way is peculiarly dangerous on account 
of the frequent falling of avalanches, and the traveller walks in dread of 
instant destruction. Samuel Rogers puts it thus  
'Then my guide  Lowering his voice addressed me: 'Through this gap On and say 
nothing; lest a word, a breath, 
Bring down the winter's snow, enough to whelm 
An army.'  Thus when alarmed by an awakened conscience men walk in fear from 
hour to hour, trembling lest a thought or word of sin should bring down upon 
them the impending wrath of God. Thrice happy is he who has traversed that 
awful gap of terror and now breathes freely because sin is pardoned, and 
therefore every apprehension is removed. 
 


## Texts: Memorable


One looks with interest on that ancient stone at Kingston-upon-Thames, upon 
which so many Saxon kings were crowned, but far more reverent is the gaze we 
fix upon those texts of Scripture whereby (through God's grace) many have been 
made kings unto our God. We rail them off in a special enclosure and place them 
where the highways meet, that others may look on them and find their 
coronations 
at the selfsame spot.  
 


## Theology: Ought Not to Be Petrified Scripture


Petrarch's works are said to have laid so long in the roof of St. Mark's, at 
Venice, that they became turned into stone; by what process deponent sayeth 
not. To many men it might well seem that the Word of God had become petrified, 
for they receive it as a hard, lifeless creed, a stone upon which to sharpen 
the daggers of controversy, a stumbling-block for young beginners, a millstone 
with which to break opponents' heads, after the manner experienced by Abimelech 
at Thebez. A man must have a stout digestion to feed upon some men's theology; 
no sap, no sweetness, no life, but all stern accuracy, and fleshless 
definition. Proclaimed without tenderness, and argued without affection, the 
gospel from such men rather resembles a missile from a catapult than bread from 
a Father's table. Teeth are needlessly broken over the grit of systematic 
theology, while souls are famishing. To turn stones into bread was a temptation 
of our Master, but how many of his servants yield readily to the far worse 
temptation to turn bread into stone! Go thy way, metaphysical divine, to the 
stone-yard, and break granite for McAdam, but stand not in the way of loving 
spirits who would feed the family of God with living bread. The inspired Word 
is 
to us spirit and life, and we cannot afford to have it hardened into a huge 
monolith, or a spiritual Stonehenge: sublime, but cold, majestic, but lifeless; 
far rather would we have it as our own household book, our bosom companion, the 
poor man's counselor and friend.  
 


## Three Whats


'Never forget the three Whats. First, What from? Secondly, What by? And, 
thirdly, What to? What from? Believers are redeemed from hell and destruction. 
What by? By the precious blood of Christ. What to? To an inheritance 
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away.'  
 


## Tithes


'Tis ridiculous to say the tithes are God's part, and therefore the clergy must 
have them; why, so they are if the layman has them. 'Tis as if one of my Lady 
Kent's maids should be sweeping this room, and another of them should come and 
take away the broom, and tell for a reason why she should part with it, 'tis my 
lady's broom; as if it were not my lady's broom which of them soever had it.: 
Table Talk of John Selden  
 


## To-Day


'It is not after the storm has arisen, or the telegraph has reported that his 
ship has struck, that the merchant runs to insure his goods. He effects the 
insurance while the sun is shining and the air calm; he effects the insurance 
before the ship has cleared from the dock, or at all events before the ship has 
left the river. Go and do likewise, living, but dying men! Now is the accepted 
time; to-day, according to the true testimony of his adversaries, 'This man 
receiveth sinners.' God with us is waiting; still his terms are, 'Whosoever 
will.' To-day you may enter into life; tomorrow the door may be shut.'  
 


## Tongue


I saw a terrible fire some time ago, or rather I saw the reflection of it in 
the sky, the heavens were crimsoned with it. It burned a large manufactory to 
the ground, and the firemen had hard work to save the buildings which 
surrounded 
it. They poured streams of water on it from fifteen engines, but it licked it 
up, and would have its course till the walls gave way. That terrible fire was 
kindled by a farthing rushlight! Some years ago, I saw the black ashes of what 
the night before was a cheerful farm-yard, with its hay-ricks, corn-stacks, 
stables, and cow-sheds; and lying about upon them were the carcasses of a 
number of miserable horses and bullocks, which had perished in the flames. All 
that was done by a Lucifer match! In America the Indians strike a spark from a 
flint and steel, and set fire to the dry grass, and the flames spread and 
spread 
until they sweep like a roaring torrent over prairies as large as England, and 
men and cattle have to flee for their lives. 'Behold, how great a matter a 
little fire kindleth!' And the tongue is a fire! A few rash words will set a 
family, a neighborhood, a nation, by the ears; they have often done so. Half 
the law-suits, and half the wars have been brought about by the tongue.: James 
Bolton 
 


## Transformations of Grace


A short time ago the manufacturers of lighting gas were puzzled to know how to 
dispose of the coal-tar left in the retorts. A more useless, nauseous substance 
was hardly known to exist. Chemistry came to the rescue, and to-day not less 
than thirty-six marketable articles are produced from this black, vile, sticky 
slime: solvents, oils, salts, colours, flavours. You eat a bit of delicious 
confectionery, happily unconscious that the exquisite taste which you enjoy so 
keenly comes from coal-tar; you buy at the druggist's a tiny phial of what is 
labelled 'Otto of Roses,' little dreaming that the delicious perfume is wafted, 
not from 'the fields of Araby,' but from the foul gas retort.  
Christianity is a moral chemistry. Well wet e it for nations if it held a 
higher place among their social economics. Tarsaving is all well enough, but 
soul-saving is better. Grace transforms a villain into an honest man, a harlot 
into a holy woman, a thief into a saint. Where fetid exhalations of vice alone 
ascended, prayer and praise are to be found; where moral miasmata had their 
lair, righteousness and temperance pitch their tent. 1very sort of good thing 
is produced by godliness, and that too in hearts once reeking with all manner 
of foulness. Should not this stay every persecuting hand, hush every railing 
tongue, and incite every sanctifted spirit to continued and increasing energy.  
 


## Trials: of Young Believers


Duncan in his Sacred Philosophy of the Seasons, tells us,There is an insect 
(musca pumilionis), which is accustomed to deposit its eggs in the very core of 
the plumula, or primary shoot of wheat, so that this shoot is completely 
destroyed by the larvae. Did the plant possess no means within itself, no means 
of repairing this injury, the whole previous labor of the husbandman would, in 
this case, have been in vain. But this destruction occurring in the spring of 
the year, when the vegetable power of the plant is in its greatest vigor, an 
effect is produced somewhat analogous to that of heading down a fruit tree. 
Shoots immediately spring up from the knots, the plant becomes more firmly 
rooted, and produces 5robably a dozen stems and ears, when but for the 
temporary mischief it might have sent forth one only. Thus may it often occur 
that those early trials which appear almost to destroy the faith of young 
believers are their best friends, since they never would have been so useful 
had 
they been left to flourish as their heart desired.  
 


## Trinity: Its Mystery


It was reported of Alanus, when he promised his auditory to discourse the next 
Sunday more clearly of the Trinity, and to make plain that mystery, while he 
was studying the point by the sea-side, he spied a boy very busy with a little 
spoon trudging often between the sea and a small hole he had digged in the 
ground. Alanus asked him what he meant. The boy answers, 'I intend to bring all 
the sea into this pit.' Alanus replies, 'Why dost thou attempt such 
impossibilities, and misspend thy time?' The boy answers, 'So dost thou, 
Alanus: 
I shall as soon bring all the sea into this hole, as thou bring all the 
knowledge of the Trinity into thy head. All is equally possible; we have begun 
together, we shall finish together; saving of the two, my labour hath more hope 
and possibility of taking effect.': Thomas Adams.  
 


## Trouble: Needed


Speaking of a Norwegian summer, the Rev. H. Macmillan says:: 'The long daylight 
is very favorable to the growth of vegetation, plants growing in the night as 
well as in the day in the short but ardent summer. But the stimulus of 
perpetual solar light is peculiarly trying to the nervous system of those who 
are not accustomed to it. It prevents proper reose and banishes sleep. I never 
felt before how needful darkness is for the welfare of our bodies and minds. I 
longed for night, but the farther 11 orth we went, the farther we were fleeing 
from it, until at last, when we reached the most northern point of our tour, 
the 
sun set for one hour and a half. Consequently, the heat of the day never cooled 
down, and accumulated until it became almost unendurable at last. Truly for a 
most wise and beneficent purpose did God make light and create darkness. 'Light 
is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing to the eyes to behold the sun.' But 
darkness is also sweet, it is the nurse of nature's kind restorer, balmy sleep, 
and without the tender drawing round us of its curtains the weary eyelid will 
not close, and the jaded nerves will not be soothed to refreshing rest. Not 
till 
the everlasting day break, and the shadows flee away, and the Lord himself 
shall 
be our light, and our God our glory, can we do without the cloud in the 
sunshine, the shade of sorrow in the bright light of joy, and the curtain of 
night for the deepening of the sleep which God gives his beloved.': Rev. Hugh 
Macmillan's 'Holidays on Holy Lands.'  
 


## Truth


'He will guide you into all truth.' John 16:13. Truth may be compared to some 
cave or grotto, with wondrous stalactites hanging from the roof; and others 
starting from the floor; a cavern glittering with spar and abounding in 
marvels. Before entering the cavern you enquire for a guide, who comes with his 
lighted flambeau. He conducts you down to a considerable depth, and you find 
yourself in the midst of the cave. He leads you through different chambers. 
Here 
he points you to a little stream rushing from amid the rocks, and indicates its 
rise and progress; there he points to some peculiar rock and tells you its 
name, 
then takes you into a large natural hail, tells you how many persons once 
feasted in it, and so on. Truth is a grand series of caverns, it is our glory 
to 
have so great and wise a conductor as the Holy Spirit. Imagine that we are 
coming to the darkness of it. He is a light shining in the midst of us to guide 
us. And by the light he shows us wondrous things. He teaches us by suggestion, 
direction, and illumination.  
 


## Truth: Qualification for Learning


Ruskin, in reference to painters, declares, that 'A person false at heart may, 
when it suits his purposes, seize a stray truth here or there; but the 
relations of truth, its perfectness, that which makes it wholesome truth, he 
can 
never perceive. As wholeness and wholesomeness go together, so also sight with 
sincerity; it is only the constant desire of; and submissiveness to truth, 
which can measure its strange angles, and mark its infinite aspects, and fit 
them and knit them into the strength of sacred invention.'  
The like remark, with keener edge, applies to those who would be disciples in 
Christ's school, or aspire to be teachers in his church.  
 


## Try


No man is likely to accomplish much who moodily indulges a desponding view of 
his own capacities. By God's help the weakest of us may be strong, and it is 
the way to become so, to resolve never to give up a good work till we have 
tried 
our best to achieve it. To think nothing impossible is the privilege of faith. 
We deprecate the indolent cowardice of the man who always felt assured that 
every new enterprise would be too much for him, and therefore declined it; but 
we admire the pluck of the ploughman who was asked on his cross- examination if 
he could read Greek, .and replied he did not know, because he had never tried. 
Those Suffolk horses which will pull at a post till they drop are worth a 
thousand times as much as jibbing animals that run back as soon as ever the 
collar begins to press them.  
 


## Unbelief: Wickedness of


The late Dr. Heugh, of Glasgow, a short time before he breathed his last, said, 
'There is nothing I feel more than the criminality of not trusting Christ 
without doubt: without doubt. Oh, to think what Christ is, what he did, and 
whom he did it for, and then not to believe him, not to trust him! There is no 
wickedness like the wickedness of unbelief!' 
 


## Understanding: No Time for


'How is it, my dear,' inquired a schoolmistress of a little girl, 'that you do 
not understand this simple thing?' 'I do not know, indeed,' she answered, with 
a perplexed look; 'but I sometimes think I have so many things to learn that I 
have not the time to understand.'  
Alas! there may be much hearing, much reading, much attendance at public 
services, and very small result, and all because the word was not the subject 
of thought, and was never embraced by the understanding. What is not understood 
is like meat undigested, more likely to be injurious than nourishing.  
 


## Ungodly Men: Which Alike


In the Aosta Valley we were tormented by the recklessness of a driver who was 
drunk. Glad enough were we to change him for a sober man: sober as we thought; 
but, alas! we had only seen him in the morning, and before the afternoon bad 
much advanced his sobriety was gone, and we would willingly have taken back the 
discarded sot of yesterday. Ungodly men are very much alike when the time of 
temptation has fully come. The difference between one sinner and another is 
rather created by outward than by inward causes. Put them in-like 
circumstances, and they would be much the same. All swine are not in the mire, 
but they all love it.  
 


## Union to Christ


Two friends are said to come into Vulcan's shop, and to beg a boon of him: it 
was granted. What was it? that be would either beat them on his anvil, or melt 
them in his furnace, both into one. But without fiction, here is a far greater 
love in Christ; for he would be melted in the furnace of wrath, and beaten on 
the anvil of death, to be made one with us. And to declare the exceeding love, 
here were not both to be beaten on the anvil, or melted in the furnace; but 
without us, he alone would be beaten on the anvil, he alone melted that we 
might be spared.: Thomas Adams.  
 


## Unity: among Christians to Be Desired


Melancthon mourned in his day the divisions among Protestants, and sought to 
bring the Protestants together by the parable of the war between the wolves and 
the dogs. The wolves were somewhat afraid, for the dogs were many and strong, 
and therefore they sent out a spy to observe them. On his return, the scout 
said, 'It is true the dogs are many, but there are not many mastiffs among 
them. There are dogs of so many sorts one can hardly count them; and as for the 
worst of them,' said he, 'they are little dogs, which bark loudly, but cannot 
bite. However, this did not cheer me so much,' said the wolf; 'as this, that as 
they came marching on, I observed they were all snapping right and left at one 
another, and I could see clearly that though they all hate the wolf, yet each 
dog hates every other dog with all his heart.' I fear it is true still; for 
there are many professors who snap right and left at their own brethren, when 
they had better save their teeth for the wolves. If our enemies are to be put 
to confusion, it must be by the united efforts of all the people of God: unity 
is strength.  
 


## Untruth: in Religious Giving


Louis XI. made a donation to the Virgin Mary of the whole county of Boulogne, 
retaining, however, for his own use, the revenues thereof! A solemn deed was 
drawn up, signed, sealed, and delivered, and it bears date 1478. What a 
ridiculous farce! The instrument gives away just nothing at all. But are there 
no such farces among us? When men of mean and miserly dispositions sing certain 
of our hymns, are they not guilty of just such a pretence of generosity?  With 
abundance of goods in their power, they fumble for a threepenny-piece in their 
pockets, singing, meanwhile, 
'Were the whole realm of nature mine, 
That were a present far too small; 
Love so amazing, so divine 
Demands my soul, my life, my all.'  
 


## Usefulness: Better than Mere Capacity


A Monstrous vat, certainly, is the great tun of Heidelberg. It might hold eight 
hundred hogsheads of wine at the least; but what is the use of such wasted 
capacity, since, for nearly a hundred years, there has not been a drop of 
liquor in it! Hollow and sounding, empty and void and waste; vintages come and 
go, and find it perishing of dry rot. An empty cask is not so great a spectacle 
after all, let its size be what it may, though old travelers called this 
monster 
one of the wonders of the world. What a thousand pities it is that many men of 
genius and of learning are, in respect of usefulness, no better than this huge 
but empty tun of Heidelberg! Very capacious are their minds, but very 
unpractical. Better be a poor household kilderkin, and give forth one's little 
freely, than exist as a useless prodigy, capable of much and available for 
nothing.  
 


## Usefulness: the Least Christian to Aim at


Many true saints are unable to render much service to the cause of God. See, 
then, the gardeners going down to the pond, and dipping in their watering-pots 
to carry the refreshing liquid to the flowers. A child comes into the garden 
and wishes to help, and yonder is a little watering-pot for him. Note well the 
little water-pot, though it does not hold so much, yet carries the same water 
to the plants; and it does not make any difference to the flowers which receive 
that water, whether it came out of the big pot or the little pot, so long as it 
is the same water, and they get it. You who are as little children in God's 
church, you who do not know much, but try to tell to others what little you 
know; if it be the same gospel truth, and be blessed by the same Spirit, it 
will not matter to the souls who are blessed by you whether they were converted 
or comforted under a man of one or ten talents.  
 


## Usefulness: Wisdom Needed for


In order to reach their hearts on sacred and divine things, he strove to 
cultivate the art of conciliating even the careless and indifferent, by talking 
to them, in the first instance, on subjects in which they would be interested; 
and in this taught a precious lesson, which all who are engaged in evangelistic 
labour would do well to learn and exemplify. When acting as a regular district 
visitor in Whitechapel, London, he happened to visit a currier, to whom he was 
unknown, and his knowledge of the various processes of tanning and the 
preparation of leather, elicited the remark, 'Ah, I see you are in the trade 
yourself, sir.': From Dr. Duff's 'Lift of Lord Haddo, fifth Earl of Aberdeen.'  
 


## Wants


On a tradesman's table I noticed a book labeled WANT BOOK. What a practical 
suggestion for a man of prayer! He should put down all his needs on the tablets 
of his heart, and then present his warn' book to his God. If we knew all our 
need, what a large want book we should require! How comforting to know that 
Jesus has a supply book, which exactly meets our want book! Promises, 
providences, and divine visitations, combine to meet the necessities of all the 
faithful.  
 


## Warfare: Spiritual


In the road from Bellinzona to Lugano, on the Monte Cenere, we met with a 
detachment of carbineers, who had a station in the forest upon the mountain; we 
learned that they had been placed there by the Italian government because a 
party of bandits had been impudent enough to rob the mail. We felt all the 
safer from knowing that protectors were so near at hand. Soldiers are needed 
where brigands are abroad; nobody advises the letting of freebooters alone. We 
are occasionally asked by lovers of quietude why we draw our swords so 
frequently against the Ritualists and other Romanisers: is it not a sufficient 
answer that we are soldiers of the King of kings, and that these traitorous 
thieves not only rob the King's subjects of the gospel, but the King himself of 
his glory? Our churches need just now a strong detachment of bold and qualified 
champions to occupy themselves with hunting down the Popish brigands by 
faithful 
preaching, and hanging them up upon the gallows of scorn. Cursed is he that 
doeth the work of the Lord deceitfully in this matter at this momentous hour, 
when men's souls are destroyed, and Christ's name is dishonoured. Carbineers of 
the cross, take sure aim, and give good account of the foe.  
 


## Warnings


A very skilful bowman went to the mountains in search of game. All the beasts 
of the forest fled at his approach. The lion alone challenged him to combat. 
The bowman immediately let fly an arrow, and said to the lion, 'I send thee my 
messenger, that from him thou mayst learn what I myself shall be when I assail 
thee.' The lion thus wounded rushed, away in great fear, and on a fox exhorting 
him to be of good courage, and not to run away at the first attack: 'You 
counsel me in vain, for if he sends so fearful a messenger, how shall I abide 
the attack of the man himself?'  
If the warning admonitions of God's ministers fill the conscience with terror, 
what must it be to face the Lord himself? If one bolt of judgment bring a man 
into a cold sweat, what will it be to stand before an angry God in the last 
great day?  
 


## Watchfulness


While the Austrian general was staying at the Hotel de Ville, upon the Grand 
Canal, at Venice, we lodged at the same house, and so often as we passed his 
rooms, whether by day or night, we encountered two sentries on guard at the 
door. Our heart said to itself; whenever the King of kings deigns to make a 
chamber of our spirit, let us set holiness and devotion to be sentries at the 
entrance. When our Beloved visits us he must not be disturbed; ill thoughts 
must be repulsed, and carnal desires kept at a distance. With drawn swords let 
watchfulness preserve the sanctity of Immanuel's rest. 'I charge you, O ye 
daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes and by the hinds of the field, that ye stir 
not up, nor awake my love, till he please.'  
 


## Watchfulness: When Special Need of


When cast by providence among sinful persons who respect us, we ought to be 
peculiarly watchful. The hatred of the ungodly when poured upon Christians in 
the form of persecution, is seldom harmful to their spiritual nature, but the 
friendship of the world is always to be suspected. When the servants of the 
high priest allowed Peter to warm his hands at the fire, had Peter been a wise 
man, he would have been afraid that evil would come of it. We are disarmed by 
kindness, but it is never safe to be disarmed in an enemy's country. 'Who,' 
says the old proverb, 'could live in Rome and yet be at war with the pope?' Who 
can have much to do with sinners and not have something to do with their sins? 
The smiling daughters of Moab did more mischief to Israel than all Balak's 
frowning warriors. All Philistia could not have blinded Samson if Delilah's 
charms had not deluded him. Our worst foes will be found among our ungodly 
friends. Those who are false to God, are not likely to be true to us. Walk 
carefully, believer, if thy way lie by the sinner's door, and especially if 
that 
sinner hath acted a friendly part to thee.  
 


## Wealth: Involves Danger


It was as much as we could do to keep our feet upon the splendid mosaic floor 
of the Palace Giovanelli, at Venice: we found no such difficulty in the cottage 
of the poor glassblower in the rear. Is it one of the advantages of wealth to 
have one's abode polished till all comfort vanishes, and the very floor is as 
smooth and dangerous as a sheet of ice, or is this merely an accidental 
circumstance typical of the dangers of abundance? Observation shows us that 
there is a fascination in wealth which renders it extremely difficult for the 
possessors of it to maintain their equilibrium; and this is more especially the 
case where money is suddenly acquired; then, unless grace prevent, pride, 
affectation, and other mean vices stupify the brain with their sickening fumes, 
and he who was respectable in poverty., becomes despicable in prosperity. Pride 
may lurk under a threadbare cloak, but it prefers the comely broadcloth of the 
merchant's coat: moths will eat any of our garments, but they seem to fly first 
to the costly furs. It is so much the easier for men to fall when walking on 
wealth's sea of glass, because all men aid them to do so. Flatterers haunt not 
cottages: the poor may hear an honest word from his neighbor, but etiquette 
forbids that the rich man should enjoy the like privilege; for is it not a 
maxim 
in Babylon, that rich men have no faults, or only such as their money, like 
charity, covereth with a mantle? What man can help slipping when every body is 
intent upon greasing his ways, so that the smallest chance of standing may be 
denied him? The world's proverb is, 'God help the poor, for the rich can help 
themselves;' but to our mind, it is just the rich who have most need of 
heaven's 
help. Dives in scarlet is worse off than Lazarus in rags, unless divine love 
shall uphold him.  


## Will of Man: Adverse to the Gospel


When the dove was weary she recollected the ark, and flew into Noah's hand at 
once: there are weary souls who know the ark, but will not fly to it. When an 
Israelite had slain, inadvertently, his fellow, he knew the city of refuge, he 
feared the avenger of blood, and he fled along the road to the place of safety; 
but multitudes know the refuge, and every Sabbath we set up the sign-posts 
along the road, but yet they come not to find salvation. The destitute waifs 
and strays of the streets of London find out the night refuge and ask for 
shelter; they cluster round our workhouse doors like sparrows under the eaves 
of 
a building on a rainy day; they piteously crave for lodging and a crust of 
bread; yet crowds of poor benighted spirits, when the house of mercy is lighted 
up, and the invitation is plainly written in bold letters, 'Whosoever will, let 
him turn in hither,' will not come, but prove the truth of Watts's verse:  
'Thousands make a wretched choice, 
And rather starve than come.'  
'Tis strange, 'tis passing strange, 'tis wonderful!  
 


## Will: Not Violated by Grace


When we see a casket wrenched open, the hinges torn away, or the clasp 
destroyed, we mark at once the hand of the Theif; but when we observe another 
casket deftly opened with a master-key, and the sparkling contents revealed, we 
note the hand of the Owner. Conversion is not, as some suppose, a violent 
opening of the heart by grace, in which will, reason, and judgment are all 
ignored or crushed. This is too barbarous a method for him who comes not as a 
plunderer to his prey, but as a possessor to his treasure. In conversion, the 
Lord who made the human heart deals with it according to its nature and 
constitution. His key insinuates itself into the wards; the will is not 
enslaved but enfranchised; the reason is not blinded but enlightened, and the 
whole man is made to act with a glorious liberty which it never knew till it 
fell under the restraints of grace.  
 


## Will: the Seat of Inability


Nelson could not see the signal for suspending battle because he placed the 
glass to his blind eye, and man cannot see the truth as it is in Jesus because 
he has no mind to do so. Ungodly men are, as the country people say, 'like the 
hogs in a harvest field,' who come not out for all your shouting; they cannot 
hear because they have no will to hear. Want of will causes paralysis of every 
faculty. In spiritual things man is utterly unable because resolvedly 
unwilling.  
 


## Wisdom: Our under Differing Circumstances


It is a wise thing to exhibit prudence and hopefulness in their proper degrees 
and seasons. Some are so exultant at success as to become rash, and thereby 
secure for themselves a disaster, others are so depressed by a defeat as to be 
incapable of future action. The old Latin distich is worth quoting.  
'Si moth' vicius eras, ad craslina bela paraz'o; 
Si modo victor eras, ad crastina bela paveto.'  
'If conquer'd, for to-morrow's fight prepare;. 
If conqueror, of to-morrow's fight beware.'  
When we are most unsuccessful in our Lord's work we should rally all our forces 
for new attempts, hoping that the tide will turn, and believing that to 
perseverance the crown is certain. On the other hand when the Lord favours us 
with the largest degree of blessing we must watch with holy anxiety lest by any 
negligence or sin we should grieve the Holy Spirit and so forfeit all hope of 
future triumph.  


## Wisdom: to Win Souls


We are not wide enough awake in doing good. Pardon the reference, for the sake 
of the lesson; it shall be borrowed from Dr. Marigold's cart. When a Cheap-Jack 
has a little knot of people round his van, he eyes them all, and feels sure 
that the man who is standing over there is a butcher, and that yonder young lad 
has more money than brains, and that the girl near him is out with her 
sweetheart and is soon to be married; now, mark, he will hold up the exact 
articles which afe likely to attract these customers, and in his harangue, he 
will have jokes and telling sentences which will turn butcher, and lad, and 
lass 
into purchasers. He cares not a jot for elegance, but very much for force. He 
knows that his trade will be better pushed by homely remarks and cutting 
sentences than by the prosiest prettinesses which were ever delivered; and he 
gains his end, which is more than those of you will do who talk to people about 
their souls with as much richness of diction as:  
'The girl who at each pretty phrase let drop 
A ruby comma, or pearl full-stop, 
Or an emerald semicolon.'  
Dr. Marigold is sharp and shrewd, because self-interest makes him so, and his 
extemporary observations are so patly uttered and adroitly arranged, that he 
wins the attention of all, and the custom of many. Would to God that preachers 
and other workers for God had a tithe as much common- sense as Cheap-Jack, and 
were half as earnest to bring men to Jesus Christ as Cheap-Jack is to bring 
them to buy that tea-tray and set of real china! 0 that we were as wise to win 
the ear and heart of the particular case with which we have to deal, as he is 
in extorting a laugh and compelling the. attention of the passer-by!  


## Women: Preaching

When Boswell told Johnson one day that he had heard a woman preach that morning 
at a Quaker's meeting, Johnson replied,' Sir, a woman preaching is like a dog's 
walking on his hind legs. It is not done well; but you are surprised to find it 
done at all.' We will add that our surprise is all the greater when women of 
piety mount the pulpit, for they are acting in plain defiance of the command of 
the Holy Spirit, written by the pen of the apostle Paul. 
 


## Word of God: Everliving


How wonderfully has the Lord provided for the continuance of the vegetable 
world; he causes the plant to scatter broadcast a multitude of seeds, and bids 
the winds convey them far and wide. The fowls of the air are commissioned to 
bear berries and fruits to their proper soils, and even to bury them in the 
earth; while scores of four-footed creatures, engaged in storing up food for 
themselves, become planters of trees, and propagators of plants. Seeds bear a 
charmed life about them, they will germinate after being buried for centuries; 
they have been known to flourish when turned up from the borings of wells from 
the depth of hundreds of feet, and when ponds and lakes have been dried, the 
undrowned vegetable life has surprised the beholders by blossoming with unknown 
flowers. Can we imagine that God has been thus careful of the life of the mere 
grass of the field, which is the very emblem of decay, and yet is negligent of 
his Word which liveth and abideth for ever? It is not to be dreamed of. Truth, 
the incorruptible seed, is ever scattering itself, every wind is laden with it, 
every breath spreads it; it lies dormant in a thousand memories, it preserves 
its life in the abodes of death. The Lord has but to give the word, and a band 
of eloquent men shall publish the gospel, apostles and evangelists will rise in 
abundance, like the warriors who sprang from the fabled dragon's teeth; 
converts will spring up like flowerets at the approach of spring, nations shall 
be born in a day, and truth, and God the Lord of truth, shall reign for ever.  
 


## Word: Ways of Treating It


There are two ways of treating the seed. The botanist splits it up, and 
discourses on its curious characteristics; the simple husbandman eats and sows; 
sows and eats. Similarly there are two ways of treating the gospel. A critic 
dissects it, raises a mountain of debate about the structure of the whole, and 
relation of its parts; and when he is done with his argument, he is done; to 
him the letter is dead; he neither lives on it himself, nor spreads it for the 
good of his neighbours; he neither eats nor sows, The disciple of Jesus, 
hungering for righteousness, takes the seed whole; it is bread for to-day's 
hunger, and seed for to-morrow's supply.: W. Arnot.  
 


## Works: and Our Salvation


William Wickham being appointed by King Edward to build a stately church, wrote 
in the windows, 'This work made William Wickham.' When charged by the king for 
assuming the honour of that work to himself as the author, whereas he was only 
the overseer, he answered that he meant not that he made the work, but that the 
work made him, having before been very poor, and then in great credit. Lord, 
when we read in thy Word that we must work out our own salvation, thy meaning 
is not that our salvation should be the effect of our work, but our work the 
evidence of our salvation.  
 


## World: a Huge Desert


Living in the midst of the church of God is like sailing down the Nile in a 
boat. One is charmed with the luxuriance of either bank, and with much that is 
beautiful immediately around; but alas! at a little distance on either side 
lies a vast uncultivated, we had almost said hopeless, desert. Some are at rest 
because they never look beyond the borders of the church, but those whose 
sympathies reach to all humanity will have to carry a life-long 'burden of the 
Lord.'  
 


## World: Deception of


AEsop's fable says:: 'A pigeon oppressed by excessive thirst, saw a goblet of 
water painted on a sign-board. Not supposing it to be only a picture, she flew 
towards it with a loud whirr, and unwittingly dashed against the sign-board, 
and jarred herself terribly. Having broken her wings by the blow, she fell to 
the ground, and was killed by one of the bystanders.'  
The mockeries of the world are many, and those who are deluded by them not only 
miss the joys they looked for, but in their eager pursuit of vanity bring ruin 
upon their souls. We call the dove silly to be deceived by a picture, however 
cleverly painted, but what epithet shall we apply to those who are duped by the 
transparently false allurements of the world!  
 


## World: Its Instability


Queen Elizabeth once said to a courtier, 'They pass best over the world who 
trip over it quickly; for it is but a bog: if we stop, we sink.'  
 


## World: Not to Build Too Confidently on It


In Chili where the ground is subject to frequent shocks of earthquake, the 
houses are built of lowly height and of unenduring structure; it is of little 
use to dig deep foundations, and pile up high walls where the very earth is 
unstable; it would be foolish to build as for ages when the whole edifice may 
be in ruins in a week. Herein we read a lesson as to our worldly schemes and 
possessions: this poor fleeting world deserves not that we should build our 
hopes and joys upon it as though they could last us long. We must treat it as a 
treacherous soil, and build but lightly on it, and we shall be wise.  
 


## World: Vanity of Pursuit of


My friends, do you remember that old Scythian custom, when the head of a house 
died? How he was dressed in his finest dress, and set in his chariot, and 
carried about to his friends' houses; and each of them placed him at his 
table's head, and all feasted in his presence! Suppose it were offered to you, 
in plain words, as it is offered to you in dire facts, that you should gain 
this 
Scythian honour, gradually, while you yet thought yourself alive. Suppose the 
offer were this: You shall die slowly; your blood shall daily grow cold, your 
flesh petrify, your heart beat at last only as a rusty group of iron valves. 
Your life shall fade from you, and sink through the earth into the ice of 
Caina; 
but day by day your body shall be dressed more gaily, and set in higher 
chariots, and have more orders on its breast, crowns on its head, if you will. 
Men shall bow before it, stare and, shout round it, crowd after it up and down 
the streets; build palaces for it, feast with it at their tables' heads all the 
night long; your soul shall stay enough within it to know what they do, and 
feel 
the weight of the golden dress on its shoulders, and the furrow of the crown 
edge of the skull; no more. Would you take the offer, verbally made by the 
death 
angel? Would the meanest among us take it, think you? Yet practically and 
verily 
we grasp at it, every one of us, in a measure; many of us grasp at it in its 
fullness of horror. Every man accepts it who desires to advance in life without 
knowing what life is; who means only that he is to get more horses, and more 
footmen, and more fortune, and more public honour, and: no more personal soul. 
He only is advancing in life whose heart is getting softer, whose blood warmer, 
whose brain quicker, whose spirit is entering into living peace.: John Ruskin.  
 


## Worldliness


There is a poor creature at Aosta who does not know the value of money, and 
only cares for eating, drinking, and sleeping. He is undoubtedly an idiot; but 
what is he who does not know the value of his soul?  
 


## Worldliness: Its Blinding Influence


Suppose I were shut up within a round tower, whose massive wall had in some 
time of trouble been pierced here and there for musketry; suppose, further, 
that 
by choice or necessity, I am whirled rapidly and incessantly round its inner 
circumference, will I appreciate the beauties of the surrounding landscape or 
recognize the features of the men who labour in the field below? I will not! 
Why? Are there not openings in the wall which I pass at every circuit? Yes; but 
the eye, set for objects near, has not time to adjust itself to objects at a 
distance until it has passed the openings; and so the result is the same as if 
it were a dead wall all round. Behold the circle of human life! of the earth, 
earthy it is, almost throughout its whole circumference. A dead wall, very near 
and very thick, obstructs the view. Here and there, on a Sabbath or other 
season of seriousness, a slit is left open in its side. Heaven might be seen 
through these; but, alas!' the eye which is habitually set for the earthly 
cannot, during such momentary glimpses, adjust itself to higher things. Unless 
you pause and look steadfastly, you will see neither clouds nor sunshine 
through 
these openings, or the distant sky. So long has the soul looked upon the world, 
and so firmly is the world's picture fixed in its eye, that when it is turned 
for a moment heavenward, it feels only a quiver of inarticulate light, and 
retains no distinct impression of the things that are unseen and eternal.: W. 
Arnof.  
 


## Worldlings: Brutishness of


Luther was told of a nobleman who, above all things, occupied himself with 
amassing money, and was so buried in darkness that he gave no heed to the word 
of God, and even said to one who pleaded with him, 'Sir, the gospel pays no 
interest.' 'Have you no grains?' interposed Luther; and then he told this 
fable:: 'A lion making a great feast, invited all the beasts, and with them 
some swine. When all manner of dainties were set before the guests, the swine 
asked, 'Have you no grains?' Even so,' continued Luther, 'even so it is, in 
these days, with carnal men; we preachers set before them the most dainty and 
costly dishes, such as everlasting salvation, the remission of sins, and God's 
grace; but they, like swine, turn up their snouts, and ask for money. Offer a 
cow a nutmeg, and she will reject it for old hay.'  


## Worldly Merriment


I think the men of this world like children in a dangerous storm in the sea, 
that play and make sport with the white foam of the waves thereof coming in to 
sink and drown them; so are men making fool's sports with the white pleasures 
of a stormy world that will sink them. But, alas! what have we to do with their 
sports which they make? If Solomon said of laughter that it was madness, what 
may we say of this world's laughing and sporting themselves with gold and 
silver, and honours, and court, and broad large conquests, but that they are 
poor souls, in the height and rage of a fever gone mad? Then a straw, a fig, 
for all created sports and rejoicing out of Christ.: Samuel Rutherford.  
 


## Youthful Piety: Advantage of


In an election the first votes recorded count all the day long, and so 
encourage the party all through the anxious hours of polling. When men give in 
their names for Jesus and his cause in the morning of their lives, their whole 
existence influences their time, and their encouragement to the good cause is 
life-long. Young people, remember this!  
 


## Zeal


Humboldt, in his travels, observes, 'It seems remarkable that in the hottest as 
well as the coldest climates, people display the same predilection for heat. On 
the introduction of Christianity into Iceland, the inhabitants would be 
baptised only in the hot springs of Hecla; and in the torrid zone, in the 
plains 
as well as on the Cordilleras, the natives flock from all parts to the thermal 
waters.' The fact is not less noteworthy that men love spiritual warmth. Cold 
truth, even cold gospel truth, is never attractive. Ministers must be fervent, 
their spirit earnest, and their style energetic, or the many will not resort to 
them. Religion is a dish to be served hot; when it once becomes lukewarm it is 
sickening. Our baptism must be with the Holy Ghost and with fire if we would 
win the masses to hear the gospel.  
 


## Zeal for Souls


A traveler was journeying in the darkness of night along a road that led to a 
deep and rapid river, which, swollen by sudden rains, was chafing and roaring 
within its 'precipitous banks. The bridge that crossed the stream had been 
swept away by the torrent, but he knew it not. A man met him, and after 
enquiring whither he was bound, said to him in an indifferent way: ' Are you 
aware that the bridge is gone?' 'No,' was the answer. 'Why do you think so?' 
'Oh, I heard such a report this afternoon, and though I am not certain about 
it, 
you had perhaps better not proceed.' 
Deceived by the hesitating and undecided manner in which the information was 
given, the traveler pushed onward in the way of death, Soon another meeting 
him, cried out in consternation. 'Sir, sir, the bridge is gone!' 'Oh! yes,' 
replied the wayfarer, 'some one told me that story a little distance back; but 
from the careless tone with which he told it, I am sure it is an idle tale.' 
'Oh, it is true, it is true!' exclaimed the other. 'I know the bridge is gone, 
for I barely escaped being carried away with it myself. Danger is before you 
and 
you must not go on.' And in the excitement of his feelings, he grasped him by 
the hands, by the arms, by the clothes, and besought him not to rush upon 
manifest destruction. Convinced by the earnest voice, the earnest eyes, the 
earnest gestures, the traveler turned back, and was saved. The intelligence in 
both cases was the same; but the manner of its conveyance in the one gave it an 
air of a fable, in the other an air of truth.  
So it is only through a burning zeal for the salvation of the lost: a zeal 
glowing in the heart, and flashing out in the look and action and utterance: 
that the confidence of unbelief can be overcome, and the heedless travelers of 
the broad way won to the path of life and happiness. Love is the most potent 
logic: interest and sympathy are the most subduing eloquence.: Christian Work. 


## Zeal (2)


When the Spartans marched into battle they advanced with cheerful songs, 
willing to fight; but when the Persians entered the conflict, you could hear, 
as 
the regiments came on, the crack of whips by which the officers drove the 
cowards to the fray. You need not wonder that a few Spartans were more than a 
match for thousands of Persians, that in fact they were like lions in the midst 
of sheep. So let it be with the church; never should she need to be forced to 
reluctant action, but full of irrepressible life, she should long for conflict 
against everything which is contrary to God. Were we enthusiastic soldiers of 
the cross we should be like lions in the midst of herds of enemies, and through 
God's help nothing would be able to stand against us.  
 


## Zeal: Causing Unity


There was a blacksmith once who had two pieces of iron which he wished to weld 
into one, and he took them just as they were, all cold and hard, and put them 
on the anvil, and began to hammer with all his might, but they were two pieces 
still, and would not unite. At last he remembered what he ought never to have 
forgotten; he thrust both of them into the fire, took them out red-hot, laid 
the one upon the other, and by one or two blows of the hammer they very soon 
became one.  
 


