
# Proverbs 31 Verse 10

**Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above rubies.**

The whole of this beautiful description of female excellence consists of
twenty‐two verses, distinct from the remaining part of the chapter, and
forming, in themselves, a poem, of which each verse commences with a
letter of the Hebrew alphabet. It is the conclusion of that book which
has been called the storehouse of practical wisdom; and, like the
chapters of proverbs which precede it, it is admirable for its just
delineations of human character, its wise practical directions, and its
appropriate commendations and reproof. To the female sex, in all ages,
it presents many striking and valuable lessons. To the Hebrews, indeed,
accustomed to a highly figurative mode of discourse, and a perpetual
reference to proverbs and wise sayings, the various portions of this
book seem singularly appropriate; and perhaps many of those holy women
of old, of whom we read in the New Testament, learned by the study of
this poem the duties enjoined by the God of their fathers, on those who
professed to be his servants. Some of the lessons which it teaches
belong especially to older time; to days when patient unremitting
labour, and submission, and modesty, were the virtues most highly
commendable in women: but all Scripture has been written for our
learning, and its instructions belong to all times; and the Christian
woman who has received a larger Bible, and a clearer discovery of Divine
light, has, while striving to imitate the virtues and graces here
enjoined by God's Holy Spirit, the influence of even a stronger motive
than any which Jewish females could feel, since Christ has said to his
followers, "If ye love me, keep my commandments" (Jhn 14:15).

This poem has occupied much of the attention of the learned. The simple
reader of Scripture would infer from it one of two things. Either that
it was the description of some woman whose character was present to the
mind of the writer; or that it was a picture of such a woman as the
inspired writer would propose as a general example. It is by many
supposed to have been written by Bathsheba, and intended as a direction
to Solomon, under the name of Lemuel, in his choice of a wife.

It would seem, on reading the comments on Scripture, both of old and
modern authors, as if learning sometimes served chiefly to perplex and
confound simple things. Dr. Doddridge has observed, that the meaning of
Scripture, as it presents itself to the unlearned but intelligent
reader, is generally the sense in which it is intended; and, though some
limitation must be made to this remark, especially in cases in which a
knowledge of oriental character and customs aids in so important a
manner the illustration of Scripture truth, yet it is, in the main, a
just conclusion. Some of the fathers of the church, not content to see
in this description a beautiful exhibition of female character, searched
for a hidden meaning in its simple declarations. One believed that the
virtuous woman shadowed forth the sensitive soul, subject to the
understanding and the reason. Another considered that God's holy word,
the Scripture of truth, was thus signified. Some thought, with more
apparent reason, that it was emblematic of wisdom; and many, with
Ambrose and Bede, have regarded the virtuous woman as a type of the
church of Christ. Leaving, however, these mystical and spiritual
interpretations of the passage, we shall consider it as an example of
moral and religious excellence, presented by God to every woman whose
standard of life and character is found in his written word.

The word translated "virtuous," in the first verse of this poem, has a
reference also to strength of character, and implies mental and moral
energy, or courage. So, too, in the command of the apostle Paul, "Add to
your faith virtue," the more strict reading of the word would be,
"courage." "The word," says bishop Patrick, "signifies both strength, or
rather courage, and riches, and virtue. Thus in the description of
fitting persons for the magistracy (Exd 28:21), Jethro, in general,
says, they should be *anschee chajil*, which we translate, able men; and
then follows more particularly wherein their ability should consist.
Such as fear God, men of truth, men hating covetousness. I take
therefore the word to include, a great fear of God, which is so powerful
as to endue one with courage to do well, when piety is contemned, nay,
laughed at and abused."

There is throughout this portrait a firmness and consistency of
character, which renders it truly worthy of admiration, and which, owing
to the sensibility with which women generally are endued, is a virtue
demanding great moral and religious principle. Women, influenced as they
necessarily are by their feelings and affections, and rendered, by their
dependence on the stronger sex, more liable to adopt the sentiments of
others, and to have the character moulded by those to whom they are
attached, are peculiarly liable to a want of firmness in conduct. Yet
the highest commendation of God is given to this strength of character.
We find it recommended in the sacred writings, and especially enjoined
on every Christian. "Wherefore add to your faith virtue" (2Pe 1:5); "be
ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord," (1Cr
15:58), says St. Paul. Our Christian profession requires indeed to be
held with firmness, in days when those who are called Christian women
are often found conforming so much to the spirit and manners of the
world. "Hold fast," says the apostle, "the confidence and the rejoicing
of the hope firm unto the end" (Hbr 3:6); and we are to "hold fast our
profession," seeing that we have "a great High Priest, that is passed
into the heavens" (Hbr 4:14), and therefore by him we may approach
boldly unto the throne of grace, to ask for that firmness and
consistency which we so much need. And great encouragement, too, is
given to firmness; for when we are desired to "hold fast the profession
of our faith without wavering," we are directed to the cheering
consideration of the unchanging promises of Christ, "For he is faithful
that promised" (Hbr 10:23).

There was among the Hebrews a strong and deep earnestness of character,
contrasting remarkably with the listlessness and supineness of many
oriental people; and the Scripture exhibits numerous instances of moral
strength, among the Jewish women. There was Miriam, the sister of Moses
and Aaron, who in those days when Israel's God had led them through the
dry land, and overwhelmed their enemies in the deep waters, left the
privacy of domestic life, and joined with all the Hebrew women in
publicly praising their Great Deliverer; and in a noble fervour of
inspired feeling, sang that song, which no poet of later ages has ever
equalled in sublimity:

> "Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously;\
>  The horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea." (Exd 15:21)

There was Deborah, who sat beneath the palm‐tree judging Israel (Jdg
4:4-9), and even went up fearlessly to the battles of the Lord. There
was the noble‐minded daughter of the rash Jephthah, whose moral courage
failed not in the hour of danger, but who, even in the prospect of
personal sacrifices, could rejoice that her father had conquered the
enemies of her people; and with firm integrity could urge him to keep a
promise very injurious to herself. "My father, if thou hast opened thy
mouth unto the Lord, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out
of thy mouth; forasmuch as the Lord hath taken vengeance for thee of
thine enemies, even of the children of Ammon" (Jdg 11:36).

In the less troublous times of Israel, no doubt, Jewish women could be
found who, like the female of the text, were quietly performing the
duties of life, with strength and steadiness of character. But the
records of domestic life are written chiefly in the hearts of the home
circle: its events, important as they are, not only to that circle, but
also, in their eventual influence, on the whole character of a nation,
are yet too uniform and simple for the page of either inspired or
profane history; and the detail given of the Excellent Woman in this
book, is the fullest picture which is to be found in the sacred
writings, of the excellency and employments of a holy woman in her home.
Happy is that woman who well performs the duties of home, to whom home
is the sphere which concentrates her ambition, and has the largest share
of her love; and who governs her household actively and diligently, and
in the fear of the Lord!

But although no other part of Scripture gives so connected a detail of a
pious woman's works and duties, yet all the various directions to the
female sex, with which the writings of the apostles abound, accord with
its principles. "Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as it
is fit in the Lord" (Col 3:18); even so must the wives "be grave, not
slanderers, sober, faithful in all things."

Again-She is to be well reported of for good works; if she have brought
up children, if she have lodged strangers, if she have washed the
saints' feet, if she have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently
followed every good work. "In behaviour," good wives were to be "as
becometh holiness: not false accusers, not given to much wine, teachers
of good things;-to be sober, to love their husbands, to love their
children. To be discreet, chaste, keepers at home" (Tts 2:3-5).

It was from such holy mothers that the saints of the New Testament were
descended. Of such a mother, and such a grandmother, young Timothy
learned the Holy Scriptures. In homes like this were reared Martha and
Mary; those sisters of Bethany, that family whom Jesus loved, and one of
whom he gently reproved, because her energy of character led her to a
restless anxiety of serving at a moment when she should have sat and
listened to the words of her Lord. In households like these dwelt the
mother of our Saviour, and Elizabeth the blessed of the Lord-names ever
dear to us all. From such sprung Priscilla, who received the young
Apollos into her home, and expounded unto him the way of God more
perfectly; and who, with her husband, is said, by the apostle, to have
been ready, for his life, to have laid down their own necks. Of such
were Phebe, the servant of the church at Cenchrea; and Mary, who
bestowed much labour on the ministers of Christ; and many others, who,
when faithful stedfastness and pious strength of resolution led to
death, yet shrunk not even from suffering, but joined the noble army of
martyrs, and are among those who "came out of great tribulation, and
have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb."

Even in that deeply solemn hour, when the blessed Saviour yielded his
life on the cross, to atone for sinful man; at an hour when the fear of
death had power to triumph over the faith of many; when his disciples
forsook him and fled, yet holy women shrunk not from following him to
the cross.

> When foes the hand of menace shook,\
>  And friends betrayed, denied, forsook,\
>  Then woman, meekly constant still,\
>  Followed to Calvary's fatal hill:\
>  Yes, followed where the boldest failed,\
>  Unmoved by threat or sneer:\
>  For faithful woman's love prevailed\
>  O'er helpless woman's fear.

To a woman, the pious virgin Mary, the mother of the Saviour, his dying
eyes were directed, and his dying bequest made, that the beloved
disciple would take her to his own home. Oh that woman's stedfastness of
character may shrink not, either in the day of persecution, or in the
daily acts of household duty, since strength and wisdom are given now by
Him who gave it to holy women of old; that now, as then, they may follow
the Lord fully! The example here given should lead every female to seek
from the Holy Spirit, the grace to abound in holy courage and
devotedness to the Lord.
# Proverbs 31 Verse 11

**THE HEART OF HER HUSBAND DOTH SAFELY TRUST IN HER,\
 SO THAT HE SHALL HAVE NO NEED OF SPOIL.**


The perfect confidence described in this verse, implies not only a
conviction of simplicity and guilelessness of character in the wife, but
it also assures us of her discretion. No man could safely trust in one
whose conduct was not unspotted in all her intercourse with society. The
heart of her husband had no care, lest by any unguarded act, any
imprudence on her part, she should bring a reproach upon his name, or a
sorrow into his bosom. Such a woman must have shunned even the
appearance of evil. She must have acted on the principle of the Hebrew
proverb, "A good name is better than precious ointment, and loving
favour to be chosen rather than choice gold;" and, by the uniform
consistency of a virtuous life, have gained the entire confidence of him
who best knew her character.

But while the text implies this, yet it mainly refers to the assurance
entertained by her husband, of her care and skill in the management of
her household. Archbishop Cranmer renders this passage, "So that he
shall fall into no poverty," and Boothroyd translates it,"And of his
property he will not be deprived." The Septuagint Version understands
the word spoil, as referring to the woman, and not to her husband, "Such
an one as she shall not want good spoils." But, in any case, it
signifies that provident care and management, that looking after the
concerns of her family, for which we find her so often commended
throughout the poem.

The need of spoil must be explained by a reference to the usage of the
Hebrews, at this period of society. The Israelites had often obtained
spoils in their encounters with neighbouring nations. The reign of David
had been occupied by continual warfare. The pastoral community at this
time were not a tribe of idle shepherds, but those who had been men of
war from their youth; and their frequent expeditions were regarded as
acts of retaliation, for similar offences, from the herdsmen of
neighbouring tribes. Saul and David had been great warriors; and, under
the latter king, the Israelites had been so trained to military
discipline, that they appear to have been always victorious in the
field, and are frequently represented as sharing that spoil which in the
more peaceful days of Solomon was less generally enjoyed. The first
public act of Saul had been a battle against Nahash the Ammonite; and in
the description of the spoil taken, when Saul and Jonathan, and all the
Hebrews, encountered the Philistines, we see the nature of the wealth
gained by the Israelites. In the narrative given in 1 Samuel 15, we find
that the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep and oxen and calves.
And when, in the following chapter, we read that Saul fought against the
Amalekites, and sinned against Jehovah, by appropriating, as spoil,
those things which he had commanded him to destroy, we find enumerated
the sheep, and oxen, and lambs, which formed the wealth of a pastoral
people.

But if Saul, as had been sung by the Hebrew maidens, had slain his
thousands, David had slain his tens of thousands, and the records of his
life display how much wealth had been gained by the Israelites from
their enemies. At the time when David, driven from his home by the
jealousy of Saul, wandered with his men to the wilderness of Paran, they
probably supported themselves by spoil gathered from the tribes who came
down upon the shepherds of the land. The narrative of Nabal's
churlishness refers to David's protection of the herdsmen from
incursions of this nature; for when their unthankful master refused his
help to the wanderer, the young men told Abigail, and said of David's
host, "They were a wall unto us both by night and day, all the while we
were with them keeping sheep" (1Sa 25:16). And now when peace was in
Israel generally, yet in adjacent countries the same practices were
continued, and the man who sought to be rich, often shared the spoil
taken from others.

But in the case of this Jewish family there was no need of such spoil.
Industry supplied the household wants, and care kept that from waste
which industry had gathered, and the husband had no occasion to go out
to the warfare. Under the shadow of his own vine and his own fig‐tree,
he could enjoy the blessings of a peaceful life; and in his earthly home
could find that love and quietness, which might prove the best foretaste
that earth can give of the heavenly home to which he was tending.
# Proverbs 31 Verse 12

**SHE WILL DO HIM GOOD, AND NOT EVIL,\
 ALL THE DAYS OF HER LIFE.**

It is much in the power of all who dwell in the same household to
benefit each other. Hourly opportunities occur of showing kindness, of
lending aid, of practising forbearance, and of constantly doing mutual
good. But this is most especially the case with husbands and wives. If
we except the strongest of all earthly influences-that of the mother on
her child, there is none which can equal that of the conjugal relation.
Time and eternity are connected with it. Happiness or misery is
dependent on the way in which it is exercised; so important is it, that
the wise and inspired man said, "A good wife is from the Lord" (Pro
18:22).

"See that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently" (1Pe 1:22),
said the apostle Peter, when enjoining on the early converts the duties
of the Christian life; and if this is commanded to all, how much more is
it to be cultivated by those who are attached by the strongest domestic
tie! And as no marriage should be contracted without mutual love, so the
principle of love should guide a woman in all her married life, and lead
her always to do good to her husband.

A wife can do much good to her husband, by promoting his domestic
comfort. This is, indeed, placed almost wholly in her hands; it rests
with her to see that the fireside is the place of attraction, that home
is the brightest spot on earth. And love will teach ingenuity to the
faithful wife, and show to her a thousand ways by which she may endear
the home circle. If she wish to enjoy her husband's society, she must be
a keeper at home; and so arrange her family, as that he, when he returns
from the care, and noise, and contention of the world, shall find a
retreat, in which sweet converse shall beguile him of his cares, and
peace, and love, and order, and gentle welcome, and soothing sympathy,
shall form a striking contrast to the scenes he has just quitted.

Another way in which we may feel certain that the matron of the text did
good to her husband, was by sharing his cares. On many, in modern times,
the charge is not incumbent, of labouring with the hands to provide food
and raiment for the family, as did this eminent example of female
virtue. The different constitution of modern society has placed upon men
the duty of maintaining a family, and left to woman the sweeter
privilege of ordering the charities of home. Yet, even now, a wife may
do much to lessen the cares of a husband. She may not fully understand
the nature of his employments, she cannot exactly enter into the details
of his business: but she can give the attentive ear; she can endeavour
to comprehend his difficulties; she can forbear the mention of any
irritating domestic circumstances; she can soften down annoyances.
Sometimes she can cheer him by reminding him of some consoling promise
of God's word. She can show him the command of holy writ, to cast his
care upon God. She can tell him that "they that seek the Lord shall not
want any good thing" (Psa 34:10), and perhaps lead him to say with
David, "What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee" (Psa 56:3). And
when all these fail, and her anxious eye sees the cloud still darken
over his brow, then she can pray, with a firm, unwavering faith, that
God would indeed "lift up the light of his countenance upon him, and
give him peace" (Num 6:26).

Nor is it less her duty to share in his joys. If her husband have
succeeded in some pursuit, with what heartiness should the wife enter
into his pleasure. Never should the wandering eye betray that she
listens with indifference to the details which interest him. She should
value his pursuits, if for no other reason than because they are his;
and by an ever ready sympathy should "do him good, and not evil, all the
days of her life" (Pro 31:12). Never should the depressing fear, or the
ardent hope, be thrown coldly back again on him who utters it. One such
repulsion will do more to alienate the love of a sensitive mind, than
many little acts of neglect or annoyance.

A wife will also do her husband good by encouraging him to holiness and
virtue, and warning him against sin. In the intimacy of domestic life,
the first tendency to evil is sometimes evident to the wife, and it is
her duty to rebuke with all gentleness, and to plead with all
earnestness, against conduct which may be displeasing to God and man.
Abigail's reproof and counsel of David, is a beautiful instance of
womanly tact and delicacy thus employed. When Nabal, in return for
David's kindness and protection, had contemptuously refused refreshments
to the warrior shepherd, how does Abigail propitiate David's wrath, and
dissuade him from revenge! "And it shall come to pass, when the Lord
shall have done to my lord according to all the good that he hath spoken
concerning thee, and shall have appointed thee ruler over Israel; that
this shall be no grief unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my lord,
either that thou hast shed blood causeless, or that my lord hath avenged
himself" (1Sa 25:30-31). And in like manner, how often may the wife
expostulate with her husband, and thus keep him from evil that it may
not grieve him; and in after days, he may look back with gratitude and
affection for the warning voice which checked his onward course, and
bade him pause and consider.

The wife of the text did her husband no evil. She neither wasted his
wealth, nor neglected his comfort, nor was careless of his reputation,
nor provoked him to anger. She loved him with a steady love all the days
of her life; in joy and in sorrow, in sickness and in health. Years
passed on and saw it fixed, while all around was changing. It was not
like the vapoury cloud upon the blue sky, driven about by every wind of
heaven, and skimming lightly over the surface; but as the rock in the
midst of the waters, against which the waves might dash and bring no
change, and on which all the alternations of sun and wind fell
harmlessly, and which stood unshaken by all things. Seldom is love like
this-love which can bear the test of time, and the shock of
adversity-love which can flourish even amid infirmities: seldom is it
found but in the home of the loved and loving.

> They who love us till we die,\
>  Who in sorrow have been tried,\
>  Who will watch our closing eye\
>  When all grows cold beside:\
>  Where shall friends like these he found,\
>  Search the earth and ocean wide;\
>  On what hallowed spot of ground\
>  Save our own fireside?
# Proverbs 31 Verse 13

**SHE SEEKETH WOOL AND FLAX,\
 AND WORKETH WILLINGLY WITH HER HANDS**


The whole description, given by the inspired writer, of the employments
of the Jewish matron, belongs either to primitive ages, or to those
pastoral regions of modern times, in which commerce with other nations
has made little progress, and foreign manufactures are almost unknown.
Recently the Hebrew people had been engaged continually in battle, and
now the men of Israel were chiefly occupied with agriculture and
pastoral employments. Trade with other lands was confined to occasional
barter, and the various stuffs needful for the clothing of the
household, though sometimes wrought by the professed weaver, were
chiefly fabricated by the hands of the mistresses or maidens of the
Jewish homes. Solomon, indeed, had fetched spices from Arabia, and fine
linen from Egypt; and in his love for natural history, had assembled in
his capital the birds and animals of distant countries; yet his traffic
seems to have been almost confined to his own requirements, and not to
have extended itself to his subjects. In such a state of society, the
domestic industry of the female part of the population becomes so
necessary, that it is always encouraged and valued. The ancient Romans,
under circumstances somewhat similar, expected from their wives a great
degree of attention to household employments, and this was enjoined by
their marriage rites. So also among the Greeks, in the early ages of the
world, the mistress worked with her servants, and the high‐born lady as
well as the daughter of the peasant performed those humble and more
active duties, generally left, in our time and country, to the poor.
Homer intimates that the daughters of princes washed in the fountain the
clothing of the family; while from Scripture we learn, that Rebecca, the
heiress of a pastoral prince, gave drink to the servant of Abraham, and
afterwards drew water for himself and his cattle. Rachel, too, the
beautiful daughter of one who possessed sheep and herds in abundance,
yet kept her father's flocks on the plains of Syria, exposed to the
scorching heat of day, if not to the heavy dews of night. Even now in
the pastoral regions of Asia, it is the glory of a woman that her own
hand has wrought the clothing of her husband, son, or brother, and has
decked the walls of their dwellings; and a helpless, useless woman,
would be despised by the other females of her tribe.

> So it was of old,\
>  That woman's hand, amid the elements\
>  Of patient industry and household good,\
>  Reproachless wrought, twining the slender thread\
>  From the light distaff; or in skilful loom\
>  Weaving rich tissues, or with glowing tints\
>  Of rich embroidery, pleased to decorate\
>  The mantle of her lord. And it was well;\
>  For in such sheltered and congenial sphere\
>  Content with duty dwell.

And this diligent industry, so applicable to the wants of the people,
had its praise of God, while the luxurious and delicate habits of the
daughters of Zion, in later ages, are marked with his displeasure. It is
with stern reprobation that the prophet Isaiah speaks of the rings, and
chains, and mufflers, and fine linen, of the Jewish ladies, whose
haughty demeanour called for the solemn threatenings of God; and all
whose ornaments were to be forgotten soon, when Zion, the faithless
Zion, should be full of mourning and lamentation, and "being desolate
should sit upon the ground" (Isa 3:16-26).

Owing to the almost unchanging customs of Eastern nations, the people of
modern Palestine are probably clothed nearly in the same manner as the
ancient Hebrews, and a variety of woollen and linen garments are still
worn in that land. When Hannah made the young Samuel a little coat, and
brought it to him, year by year, as she came up with her husband to the
yearly sacrifice, she performed the part of a mother in Israel; and in
all likelihood carried to her beloved child a garment of pure white
linen, or wool, for such were much worn by the ancient Jews, to whom
frequent purifications and washings were commanded by Israel's God. It
might have been, however, a coat, like that of Joseph, of many colours,
for brilliant dyes and skilful embroidery were often used by the
Israelites to ornament their dresses. One prohibition on the subject of
woollen clothing had been given to the Jews. God had forbidden them to
wear a garment made of woollen and linen, for in such a dress the
heathen priests worshipped their false gods, in the superstitious hope
of a blessing on their flax and their sheep; and the one true God, the
Great Jehovah, would that his chosen race should come out from
idolaters, and be a separate people.

The excellent woman whom we are considering, was evidently a person of
wealth and distinction-she was the wife of one who sat among the elders
of the land, and we may reasonably suppose that she gathered the flax
from her own fields, as well as that the wool was the produce of her own
flocks. Flax was one of the plants earliest cultivated by mankind in
masses. Its bright green stalks withered before the plague of hail,
which came upon Egypt, when the flax and barley were smitten; and its
bright blue flower seems to have been very abundant in

> That fertile land, where mighty Moses stretched\
>  His rod miraculous.

A little later in the history of the world, we find a woman preparing it
for use, for Rahab had laid the stalks of flax on the roof of her house,
that the scorching sun and the damp Syrian dews might macerate its
fibres, when the spies entreated her compassion, and were hidden by her
among the half‐dried plants. "By comparing the several passages in
Scripture," says Kitto, "in which flax is mentioned, we shall find the
amount to be, that flax was cultivated to a considerable extent in
Palestine; that garments of it were worn not only by the priests and
Levites, but very largely by the people. The coarse linen cloths were
manufactured at home by the women, but the finer were imported from
Egypt; the ancient celebrity of which country, for its linen fabrics, is
abundantly confirmed in Scripture. We cannot find that flax is now much
cultivated in Palestine, although considerable attention is paid to the
culture of cotton. It may be that the soil and climate are less suited
than that of Egypt to its production."

There is a cheerfulness and heartiness in the character which the
inspired writer gives of the Jewish woman. She "worketh willingly," or
as some translate it, "with the delight of her hands;" and it is this
willingness which lends a grace to every household employment, and
infuses a spirit of alacrity into the daily duties of life. Cheerful
willingness is no small virtue in a woman; for the duties performed with
a smiling countenance and a ready hand, are far differently done from
those which seem wrung out of necessity, and are accompanied by a
mournful voice, and a languid footstep. A willing mind is enjoined, by
God's word, on every performance of duty. With the Most High, the motive
of the heart is regarded, rather than the outward act. So we learn that
in working for God, "If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not"
(2Cr 8:12): while to both mistress and servant comes the exhortation
respecting the humble duties of every‐day life, "Whatsoever ye do, do it
heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men" (Col 3:23).

If we consider the benefits which we hourly receive from the Great Giver
of all good gifts, we shall see that a willing cheerfulness is indeed
but the proper response which should be given by his human family. There
may, it is true, be a cheerfulness which is in no way connected with
thankfulness, but never yet was there a thankful spirit which did not
lead to acts of cheerful service. And notwithstanding the various
sorrows which sin has brought into the world, yet how much remains to
gladden the heart of one who is disposed to observe God's goodness. How
do all our senses minister to enjoyment! The sense of touch, and the
sense of taste, are continually gratified, and delicious odours greet us
from a thousand flowers. And the eye of man, how is it an inlet to
wisdom, and what beautiful forms, and what gorgeous colourings please
our sight, and thus charm our imagination, till we are, lost in wonder
at the sublime, or melt in tenderness at lowly beauty! And the ear, too,
made as it is to receive the impression of all sweet sounds and
concords, how do the tunes of birds, and the roar of waters, and the
sweet tinklings of the distant bell, and the low murmuring of the
pleasant brooks, and the soothing influence of kindly voices, bring
through it a song of joy to the spirit, or, sweeter still, a song of
softened and pensive tunefulness. And when outward nature speaks to us
through the senses, then and then only is it rightly received, while it
tells of God and his goodness; and when the grateful heart prompts words
of thankfulness to the ready tongue, and the willing hand performs the
active service, in the spirit of him who said, "What shall I render unto
the Lord for all his mercies?" (Psa 116:12).

And if all might render willing service to God in acknowledgment of
mercies, how much more shall the child of God be ready to perform every
duty with an enlightened thankfulness! To him is given the precious
Bible; on him are bestowed its promises, cheering him under every
sorrow, and telling him that God is with him in the darkest hour, yea,
even in the valley of the shadow of death. To him is access given to the
throne of grace, so that his prayers rise up to God, through the
intercession of the great Mediator. For him the Saviour lived a life of
sorrow and humiliation, and died a dishonoured death, that his sins
might be pardoned, and his soul saved from the wrath which God denounces
against the transgressors of his holy law. To him are often given holy
aspirations after God's presence, and a sure sense of his love; so that
he seems able to join even in the songs of heaven, and his spirit seems
carried away for a while from his earthly house, up to that glorious
home of rest which is eternal, and where God and the blessed angels
shall at last receive him.

Every one must have remarked how pleasant is that household in which a
cheerful spirit of energy is cultivated by the mistress and mother. It
is a pleasant thing to dwell with one who is not troubled by trifling
annoyances, who is skilled in looking at the bright side of things, and
hoping for the best; with one who believes that all the ways of the Lord
are right, and who attaches a deep importance to duty. Such a one will
work willingly, in the belief that God has appointed both her lot and
her duties, and it is surprising how many obstacles are met and overcome
by such a spirit.

> The wise and active conquer difficulties\
>  By daring to attempt them. Sloth and folly\
>  Shiver and shrink at sight of toil and trouble,\
>  And make the impossibilities they fear.

The employments of daily life, of women especially, need often the
remembrance that they are done in the sight of Him, in whose eye the
lowliest act is of importance. There are many persons who do not perform
them well, because they do not look upon them as part of their religious
duties. Such persons could perhaps make great sacrifices for conscience
sake; they could act nobly and wisely if any great service were
demanded; but they do not consider that the whole progress of human life
consists of a succession of small acts. It is often with lesser duties
as with lesser trials, that strength to do or to bear is not sought of
God. Some great trial befalls us, some important sacrifice is required,
and feeling our helplessness, we fall back upon God, and support is
given; but every‐day events are, by their very monotony, unimpressive;
we think lightly of them, and the help of God is not sought, and they
are not duly considered, and so are performed in a careless, perhaps in
an unwilling spirit. But He who is the Judge of all the earth, looks
down with approval on the mother whose life is one daily course of
self‐sacrifice, on the daughter whose gentle smiles and willing work
render home happy, rather than on her who is roused from a course of
usual listlessness to some one act of great exertion, or to some one
costly deed of self‐denial. The flash of lightning produces a great
effect; and the clearer air, and the cloudless sky, show that it has
well performed God's mission; yet who would not rather that her light
should shine like that of the evening star, whose tranquil rays nightly
guide the traveller home, and cheer the mariner on the deep, and smile
sweetly on the shepherd who watches by his fold, till they "fade away
into the light of heaven."
# Proverbs 31 Verse 14

**SHE IS LIKE THE MERCHANTS' SHIPS;\
 SHE BRINGETH HER FOOD FROM AFAR.**


The merchants' ships, in king Solomon's days, might, indeed, be said to
bring their cargoes from afar. If we look at the record of the sea
voyages made at this time, when the Hebrew king was assisted by Hiram,
who furnished him with "shipmen who had knowledge of the sea," we shall
find that they occupied a very considerable period. "For the king had at
sea a navy of Tharshish with the navy of Hiram: once in three years came
the navy of Tharshish, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and
peacocks" (1Ki 10:22). The Phoenicians, who resided on the north‐west of
Palestine, are known to have had a commercial settlement, called
Tartessus, on the Atlantic coast of Spain, near to the modern Cadiz; and
whatever may be the various opinions respecting the situation of ancient
Ophir, there is little doubt that this port was the Tharshish of the
Scriptures. In the imperfect state of navigation, the voyages, performed
as they were in small and ill‐constructed vessels, would seem to the
Israelites "afar" indeed, and attended with very considerable peril.

But as food rather than other merchandise seems alluded to in the text,
it is probable that the ships which brought corn from Egypt are here
referred to. Although the ancient Hebrews were decidedly an agricultural
community, and the rich valley of Palestine abounded in corn and wine,
yet in seasons of dearth, as well as on other occasions, the Jewish
people appear to have traded with Egypt for corn. On the fertile lands
of that well‐watered country, corn grew so abundantly, that Egypt was
the general granary of the East; and the touching narrative of Joseph
and his brethren at once occurs to the mind, as an instance in which men
went down into Egypt to buy corn.

The Israelites were by no means a maritime people; yet bordered as the
Holy Land was by the Great Sea, now called the Mediterranean, which was
the very highway of commerce, and familiar as they were with the Nile,
on whose shores their fathers had served a hard service to the line of
Pharaohs, they doubtless had many ships of burden, which were, at least,
as well‐constructed as those in the western parts of the world at the
same period of time. It must be remembered that their vessels were
almost exclusively ships of merchandise. As yet, no battle‐ship had
carried proud defiance to the peaceful shores; no cannon thundered its
awful challenges on the deep: but the ship, in its occasional course
over the waters, brought from afar the luxuries or the food of other
lands, and bore in its welcome progress nothing to fill the heart with
sorrow, or to leave a trace of that anguish and desolation which war
brings so often now over the distant sea.

Very early mention is made in Scripture of ships. "Zebulun shall dwell
at the haven of the sea; and he shall be for an haven of ships" (Gen
49:13), was the prophecy of the dying patriarch, as his eye, though
dimmed to the sights of this world by the film of death, glanced forth
and kindled at the view of futurity: and yet no regular trade by sea
seems to have been established in Solomon's day, since he was obliged to
seek aid from Hiram. Many beautiful spots on the shores of the sea are
familiar to Scripture readers, and the vessels which floated on the Lake
of Gennesareth were often honoured by the presence of Him, who disdained
not the poor and the lowly, but gathered his apostles from among
fishermen, and standing on the prow of a Jewish vessel, delivered to the
people on the shore those beautiful parables, and those teachings of
heavenly love and wisdom, which brought many to his feet as his
disciples, and are now the treasure of millions of hearts, to whom the
truths taught by the Saviour are dearer than gold or silver, more
precious than life itself.

The Jewish matron, whose various kinds of manufacture are so
specifically named, would have much to offer in exchange either for corn
or other commodities, which the merchants' ships convey. Garments, made
of fine wool or of hair stuffs; gorgeous tapestry wrought by her own
hands; fine linen girdles-all were suitable objects of barter; and the
rich clusters of grapes which her vineyard could furnish, and the
well‐dried flax from her fields, constituted a store, from which
something might be well spared. It seems probable, however, that the
articles chiefly sent by her, either to distant tribes, or perhaps
occasionally to lands beyond the seas, were those costly and magnificent
dresses, which form the wealth of the eastern female, and which are
highly scented with perfumes, and laid up for many years, to be brought
out only on important occasions. The use of dresses also as presents, in
the East, would render the barter of them a very likely and considerable
source of profit, and this would enable this Jewish lady, whose
intelligent and well‐devoted industry is so often commended, to procure
for her family some of those enjoyments from afar, which the home
produce would not supply.
# Proverbs 31 Verse 15

**SHE RISETH ALSO WHILE IT IS YET NIGHT,\
 AND GIVETH MEAT TO HER HOUSEHOLD, AND A PORTION TO HER MAIDENS.**


It is said in a proverb in the preceding part of this book, that "every
wise woman buildeth her house, while the foolish plucketh it down with
her hands." The stability and comfort of the household are, indeed, so
dependent on the domestic arrangements of her who presides; punctuality
and order in the wife are so necessary for the preservation of the
property which may have been acquired, that the truth of the old Irish
saying, "A man must ask his wife's leave to be rich," is very apparent.
Early risers will not often be found among those whose habits are
irregular and disorderly. The practice of beginning the work with the
commencement of the day, is almost always found in conjunction with
punctual and diligent habits, and with such love of order and management
as is described in the text.

The learned Aben Ezra poetically interprets the expression of the former
part of the verse, "She riseth before the ascent of day." Early rising
in the East is different from that of our native land. To be up with the
lark, or when the robin is first uttering his morning song; to brush
away the pearls from the grass, while the sun is just driving afar the
grey mists of the morning-this is, with us, to rise early. But the
diligent man of eastern lands is up long before sunrise, long before

> Morn, her rosy steps\
>  Advancing, sows the earth with orient pearls;"

and has begun his labour at an hour when the European is sleeping still,
with the sound sleep of midnight. And when the dawn breaks over the
vineyards of Palestine, and the sun sheds his red lustre on her ruddy
hills, the vine‐dresser has tended his vine, and the shepherd has led
forth his flock from the fold. In the city, too, the merchant is busy in
the shop; and the courtier and the king are occupied in the business of
the court; and the women are spinning the web of industry. Among the
Hebrews, it was also customary for the diligent women to be up earlier
than the men; for adding to the usual domestic employments of females in
general, the duty of manufacturing various fabrics of use or
merchandise, the day was never too long for their busy skill, and they
knew nothing of that weariness which belongs to the idle, and which
deprives them of that freshness and energy of character which make
existence a blessing.

We find continual reference in Scripture to the habit of beginning the
business of the day at a very early hour in the morning. Thus when Moses
was sent to Pharaoh, by the Lord God of the Hebrews, and the haughty
king was commanded to let the people of Israel go out from their cruel
bondage, the Jewish lawgiver was commanded to rise up early in the
morning, and to stand before Pharaoh as "he cometh forth to the water"
(Exd 8:20). And when the vain and deceitful Absalom sought to win away
the hearts of Israel from their allegiance to his father, "he rose up
early and stood beside the way of the gate" (2Sa 15:2) of the city; for
he well knew, that passing through its arches, he should meet those who
were going out of the town to the daily labour of the fields, or find
there assembled the concourse of merchants. And in that day of Israel's
affliction and reproach, when the walls of Jerusalem had been broken
down, and the gates thereof burned with fire; and Nehemiah and the Jews
laboured amidst danger and anxiety to build again the walls of their
beloved city, we find them early at their work, cheered by the promises
and prayers of the diligent prophet; and while some laboured, half of
them "held the spears from the rising of the morning till the stars
appeared" (Neh 4:21). And well would it be for us if we could return to
the early rising and retiring, once general even in our own land, when
our forefathers saw the sun set on their native hills, and slept on
their less luxurious couches, at an hour far earlier than the business
of the day now closes on busy multitudes.

The description given by the Hebrew writer is so graphic, that our
imaginations can easily picture the Jewish matron, as surrounded by her
family at early day, and apportioning to each of her household, not only
daily food, but also daily work. One is going to the field, another to
relieve the herdsman who has watched through the starry night on the
hill side, or on the plain. Her daughters and her maidens will ply the
distaff, or with the needle weave delicate embroideries; and the
materials for the work of each must be selected, and, by a judicious
division of labour, all be made easy. And in this diligent and
well‐ordered family, not only must the domestic animals be cared for,
but the young infant must be tended, and the older child taught to walk
in wisdom's ways, and to know the law of the God of Israel. The word
here translated "portion," seems certainly to include work as well as
food. The Targum renders it by service, and interprets the passage as
meaning employment, rather than a portion of daily meat. The same word
is used in Exodus 5:14, when the taskmasters of the children of Israel
demanded, "Wherefore have ye not fulfilled your *task* in making brick
both yesterday and today as heretofore?" The Septuagint, as well as the
Syriac and Arabic versions, render the word "works."

The ancient custom of dividing the food into separate portions, is
alluded to not only in several parts of the Sacred Scripture, but is
frequently mentioned by profane writers. Thus when the ambassadors of
Agamemnon were received at the table of Achilles, the warrior
distributed to every man his portion. Among the Romans an officer
presided over this distribution at the ancient meal, and seems to have
borne a similar office to him who is mentioned in the narrative of the
marriage of Cana, as the governor of the feast. And when Joseph
entertained his brethren who had come up to Egypt, we mark how, with the
peculiar love which the man of the East feels for the brother who claims
the same mother as himself, he apportioned to his beloved Benjamin a
mess five times as large as that of any of his other brethren. Not but
that each had a portion large enough for his refreshment, but that a
stronger warmth of hospitality might mark his deeper love to him, whom
his dying mother had called "the son of my sorrow."

The right economy of time is a highly important duty. To those who are
called to exercise the duties of active life, this is very evident. The
mistress, the mother, and the domestic servant, these will all feel the
value of time; yet no gift is more often wasted, by those to whom God
has allotted a large portion of leisure. The waste of time is a sin
especially chargeable on a large number of the female sex in the present
day. Hours are wasted in frivolous accomplishments; in the performance
of some of the lighter works of art; in dissipated visiting; in reading
novels and idle books; and in absolute lounging and indolence: so that
if we could trace the history of the life of many an Englishwoman, we
should find her employments of little more worth to herself and others,
than those of the butterfly which skims from flower to flower, the gay
creature of the summer's day. And yet to every reasonable being
existence brings an amount of responsibility, which we shall comprehend
only in eternity. Time is given us for duty, for the preparation for a
future state, for the good of others; and every fragment of it should be
gathered up, that nothing of so precious a gift may be lost. It should
become a subject of deep and frequent thought to every woman, and
especially to every Christian woman, whether her time is rightly spent.
Owing to the great improvements in manufactures, and the high
civilization of modern society, women in the middle and higher classes
of life are rarely required to apply unremittingly to any pursuit which
can be called toil or labour. Many have no pursuit at all. And is there
nothing to do, that God should look down on the couch of the luxurious,
when the morning sun has long shed his light on its drapery, and should
see the sleeper still seeking repose? Is there nothing that the daughter
or sister can do to lighten the cares or anxieties of parents or
brothers? Is there no active duty, which, if cheerfully done, would make
home happier? If we are not required, like the excellent women of old,
to rise while it is yet night, and to apportion to those of our
household food or work, yet there is still enough to do. There are our
hearts to examine as in the sight of God. There are prayer and
meditation, and reading of the Scripture, all best done in the quiet of
early day, ere the noise and tumult of the tempting world have
distracted the thoughts. David could say, when referring to his moments
of prayer, "My soul prevented the dawning of the morning," and could
deem it a "good thing" to "show forth the loving‐kindness of the Lord in
the morning" (Psa 92:2) and as his soul thirsted for God, he exclaimed,
"Early will I seek thee." In the solemn moment of approaching suffering,
our Saviour himself rose a great while before day, that he might commune
with his Father (Mar 1:35).

But besides the study of God's word, there is also the duty of mental
improvement. For this end, we should seek to redeem the time, and see
that the early hours are not wasted. An hour gained daily from sleep,
how much might be done with this, in the study of any valuable species
of knowledge! How much might we learn of any one portion of nature, by
an hour of daily reading and observation! And does not nature tell of
God? It is not the stars alone, and the sun and moon, which speak of
God's greatness and power, and so from day unto day utter speech, and
from night unto night teach knowledge. All his works praise him. The
sea, with its ebb and flow, and changing tides, and all its curious
store of weeds and corals, and its silver‐spangled fishes, has a
wondrous lesson to teach the docile spirit, of God's power and love. The
softly flowing stream, gladdening the verdant herbage, and serving as a
home of happiness to the living creatures which inhabit it, and as a
scene of sport to the brilliant‐winged insects of all the bright hues of
earth and heaven, which hover above it: the flowery meadow, and the
dark‐robed forest; the bird with its plumage dipped in hues of Paradise,
and its song suggesting thoughts of poetry,-all, all have been studied
by human minds, which have lived in ages before we were born, and their
wonders and their histories have been traced by human pens, and we may
read their records in books, and learn their teachings beneath the
morning sunshine. And health, too, that valuable blessing, how greatly
is it promoted by early hours! Many diseases, and especially those
called nervous disorders, were almost unknown in Britain a few ages
since, when luxury had not yet made it a common practice to be found in
bed in full day. Many serious illnesses would take their flight before
the long‐continued and diligent practice of an early morning walk; and
the cheek now pale from indolent habits, and the eye now dim from want
of the exercise required by the frame, might glow and sparkle with the
bloom and vigour of life, if, like the country labourer, or the diligent
rustic maiden, and the excellent woman of the text, we should rise with
the ascent of day. And if we redeemed an hour in the morning, it might
leave sus one in the after day to visit the poor and afflicted, to
instruct the ignorant, to help those who need our aid. If household
duties demanded exertion, then the gained hour might enable us to pass
through them more leisurely and more pleasantly, and we might be saved
the irritation of hurried business; or if we gave that hour to God, who
shall say what blessings our prayers might bring down on ourselves, and
on those dear to us, on the church of God, and on the world at large!
# Proverbs 31 Verse 16

**SHE CONSIDERETH A FIELD, AND BUYETH IT:\
 WITH THE FRUIT OF HER HANDS SHE PLANTETH A VINEYARD.**


In observing the various employments of the Hebrew woman, we cannot fail
to remark the great and entire confidence which must have been placed in
her by her husband. That he should leave to her care the management of
her house and servants, and in great measure the training of her
children, seems, at all times, natural, and in the state of society we
are considering, peculiarly so; but we should scarcely expect to find a
Jewish female left so entirely to her own judgment in matters of
business. It was probably, however, not unusual at this time. Abigail,
the wife of Nabal, seems to have had an entire command over the family
property, when she hesitated not to take two hundred loaves, and two
bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and fruits and other
valuable articles of food, and give them to David (1Sa 25:18). That the
woman of the text was worthy of this entire confidence is very evident,
for hers was the systematic industry of a well‐ordered mind, and not the
occasional result of mere impulse. She deliberated on the best plan to
be pursued. She saw that her children were rising up, her household
numerous, her husband a man of wealth and distinction; and the
requirements of such a family demanded a careful consideration.

Perhaps, in looking around her in order to make a provision for an
increasing household, the eye of the Hebrew woman often rested on some
field of waving corn which lay near her own estate; and she saw, in its
golden ears, the prospect of an abundant store for the food of her
family; and then, with the fruits of her own hands, the works which her
own fingers had wrought, she purchased the land. The luxuriant
vegetation of the vineyard, watered by the fruitful rill, or lying on
the hill side, where the morning sun shed most of his light and warmth,
would attract her notice, and the wild roses, and the bright
pomegranates, shedding the deep red lustre of their flowers in the
hedges which surrounded it, and wafting to her some of the sweetest of
eastern odours, would convince her that the soil which yielded them
would repay careful culture.

The rich drapery of the vine, though now less cultivated in the Holy
Land, once formed one of its most striking and picturesque objects. Far
away over the hills of the then fruitful, though now neglected,
Palestine, might be heard the joyous song of the vine‐dressers, speaking
of peace and plenty, and attesting the happy feeling and the joyous
emotion of the natives of a pure and lovely climate, whose animal
spirits and earnest feelings seemed wrought upon by the gladness of
nature, till they flowed forth in song. And many a pious Israelite may
have sung with the sweet singer of his country, "The earth is the
Lord's, and the fulness thereof" (Psa 24:1); and as he looked upon his
rich corn‐fields, have chanted gladly, "Thou visitest the earth, and
waterest it; thou greatly enrichest it with the river of God, which is
full of water: thou preparest them corn, when thou hast so provided for
it. Thou crownest the year with thy goodness; and thy paths drop
fatness" (Psa 65:9; 65:11).

But although the modern inhabitant of Palestine no longer labours
assiduously as did the ancient Israelite, to render his beautiful land
an earthly paradise, though in many parts joy and gladness have ceased
from the fruitful field, and all the daughters of music are brought low,
yet the vineyards are often beautiful still. On the Syrian hills and
plains may yet be seen the tower or the lonely cottage in a vineyard, on
which the eye of the evangelical prophet rested when he foretold the
desolation of the daughter of Zion (Isa 1:8); or when he spake of the
vineyard in the fruitful hill, planted with the choicest vine, in which
the lord of the vineyard built a tower, and made a wine‐press, and
looked for the grateful fruits of his culture, and found nothing but
wild grapes (Isa 5:4), -sad emblem of the sins and idolatries which ran
wild in the heart of God's chosen and cherished people. In this tower of
the vineyard were kept, in former days, and may still be seen, the
various implements of husbandry, and all the means of pressing the
grapes and making them into wine, so that it may be called "the farm of
the vineyard." But the chief use of the tower, both in ancient and
modern times, is as a dwelling‐place and defence to the keeper of the
vineyard, who, when the grapes are ripening, takes his station there,
lest others should deprive him of the produce of his labour. M'Cheyne,
describing the vine‐yards of Hebron, as he saw them in the year 1842,
says, "They are of the most rich and fertile description, each one
having a tower in the midst for the keeper of the vineyards. We were
told that bunches of grapes from these vineyards sometimes weigh six
pounds, every grape of which weighs six or seven drachms. Sir Moses
Montefiore mentioned that he got here a bunch of grapes about a yard in
length."

It is not possible for the reader of Scripture to have passed unnoticed
the various allusions to the culture of the grape by the Hebrews. The
great care which they bestowed on their vineyards, in selecting an
appropriate spot of land for their growth, as well as in training the
vine, is very apparent from the records of holy writ. Almost every part
of Palestine is favourable to the culture of the grape; but the grapes
of Eshcol, and Carmel, and Hermon, and the wines of Lebanon, were ever
renowned for their sweetness, and are still unrivalled in the land of
the sun. Sometimes the luxuriant plant hung its graceful festoons about
the reed trellis; at others it clung from pole to pole, or clad the
wooden palisade with a garment of verdure. Often, too, the vine‐dresser
directed its flexible branches over the side of the sunny wall, and then
its boughs, as they ran over their support, suggested such images as
lingered in the mind of the dying Jacob, when, describing the
fruitfulness, and alluding to the protection given by his beloved son,
he, in the figurative language of the eastern husbandman, said, "Joseph
is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by the side of a well; whose
branches run over the wall" (Gen 49:22).

Frequent and beautiful as are the poetic figures of the Old and New
Testament, yet no object of nature furnished so great a variety of
allusions as did the vine. Wherever the ancient Israelite looked round,
there its broad leaves and wide‐spreading boughs, and its purple
clusters, caught his eye; and the holy prophet of old, and the Divine
Saviour himself, ever ready to lead the mind from the fields of nature
to the field of holy thought and spiritual communion, failed not to
associate with it such lessons of joy and thankfulness, or of solemn
admonition, as might recur again and again, in after ages, to him who
walked in the vine‐yard. In the earliest parable of Scripture, that of
the Trees choosing a King, we find the vine, in the language of
allegory, exclaiming, "Shall I leave my wine, which cheereth God and
man, and go to be promoted over the trees?" (Jdg 9:13) thus adverting to
the use of wine in sacrifice, or to the first‐fruit offering of the
grape on the altar of God, as well as to its benefit to mankind. In that
beautiful lament of forsaken Israel, expressed in Psalm lxxx., the
writer portrays the sorrows of the church of God, under the image of a
vine; and carries out, through a long succession, a series of figures so
beautiful and touching, that he who now reads it mourns over ancient
Israel's woes, and remembers, too, periods in the history of the
Christian church, when the vine seemed indeed trodden down, and when,
for "a small moment," God "hid his face" from his people. "Once," says
the sorrowing Asaph, "the hills were covered with the shadow of it, and
the boughs were like goodly cedars. She sent out her boughs to the sea,
and her branches unto the river. Now the boar out of the wood doth waste
it, and the wild beast of the field doth devour it." And surely, as we
look upon God's ancient people, and see how their loved and holy city is
trodden down of the Gentiles, we should breathe the aspiration of the
psalmist, "Return, we beseech thee, O God of hosts; look down from
heaven, and behold, and visit this vine; and the vineyard which thy
right hand hath planted, and the branch that thou madest strong for
thyself" (Psa 80:14-15). In later days, our Saviour told his disciples,
"I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman.-As the branch
cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can
ye, except ye abide in me" (Jhn 15:1, 4). Then perchance he looked from
the table, around which the disciples were gathered, and saw the
graceful plant waving to the gentle summer wind, and putting forth its
fruits for the vintage.

There is something pleasing in considering the Hebrew matron in the
text, as planting a vineyard for the use of her family. It was not
enough for her that only what was absolutely needed should be supplied.
She acted in the wise and beneficent spirit of the Great Creator, who
scatters with liberal hand, not only the supply of our necessities, but
the means of enjoyment; who charms the eye with verdure, and the ear
with the songs of nature. We, in our northern climate, can scarcely form
an idea of the value of the vineyard to an eastern family: the cooling
shade of its overhanging boughs, in a land where the sun shines hotly
through the long summer day, is indeed delightful; and in the Syrian
vine‐clad arbour, the Jewish families assembled, as do the natives of
modern Palestine, beneath the vine and fig‐tree. There, in pleasant
groups, sitting in the soft air, we can fancy the pious mother,
surrounded by her family, speaking with cheerful and thankful spirit of
God's goodness to them all, and partaking together with them of the
large clusters of yellow or purple fruits, gathered from the boughs.
There lay the goodly cluster, and each took from it the welcome
refreshment; and of the fruits which were to spare, the labourer
gathered and packed in baskets, and probably laid, as they would do now,
the broad palm leaves above them to preserve their coolness.

The month of October is that of the vintage; and on the hills once trod
by the feet of the patriarchs, the autumnal vintage is yet gathered. The
Christian inhabitants of Lebanon, and other parts of Palestine,
cultivate the grape for wine, both for themselves and for exportation;
and the Moslems, as they do not drink wine, value the vine for its
shadow, its fresh fruit, and for the raisins which they dry from it;
besides that, vinegar is made from the grape, and the vine‐leaves are
eaten by cattle. This latter practice is referred to in the Jewish law,
where Moses commands, "If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be
eaten, and shall put in his beast, and shall feed in another man's
field; of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own
vineyard, shall he make restitution" (Exd 22:5). Chandler says of this
practice in the East: "We remarked that about Smyrna, the leaves were
decayed or stripped by the camels and herds of goats, which are admitted
to browse after the vintage."

Travellers who now visit the Holy Land, are struck however, with the
desolate appearance exhibited by spots once famous for corn and wine,
and the luxuriant vegetation of the East. God has turned "the fruitful
land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwelt therein"
(Psa 107:34). The old inhabitants of the land of the Hebrews are
scattered as God predicted; and the thin population of strangers who now
dwell there, take little pains to cherish the soil. The want of
agricultural industry is every where apparent; and he who loves the hill
of Zion and the mountains about Jerusalem, because associated in his
mind with all that is holy and all that is dear, longs for that glorious
day, when the Jews shall again be gathered under their native vines and
fig‐trees.

It is thought by most writers, that the autumnal feast of Tabernacles,
held by the Jews, had especial reference to the ingathering of the
vineyard. "When ye have gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall keep
a feast unto the Lord seven days" (Lev 23:39), were the words which
enjoined this festival. The Syrian winter does not commence until
December, and in that pleasant climate, the month of October was well
suited for the joyous outdoor life which ancient Israel spent on this
occasion. Then the song of praise and gratitude went up from the arbours
formed of the "boughs of goodly trees, branches of palm‐trees, and the
boughs of thick trees, and willows of the brook" (Lev 23:40). Then a
loud burst of national thanksgiving was offered to the God who brought
his people into a land flowing with milk and with honey; and every
Jewish family brought its tribute of gratitude and praise.
# Proverbs 31 Verse 17

**SHE GIRDETH HER LOINS WITH STRENGTH,\
 AND STRENGTHENETH HER ARMS.**


The figurative expression here used refers to the practice of girding
tightly for any great exertion. The girdle which confines the loose and
flowing garments of the native of the East, is broad and long, and can,
when occasion requires it, be bound several times round the waist and
over the chest. This tight girding enables the men of oriental countries
to perform wonderful feats of strength, especially in running; as they
will make a journey of several miles, keeping pace with a horseman, or
with the chariot of the great man. Sometimes the girdle is so tightly
bound as to endanger life, and the editor of the "Pictorial Bible"
mentions that he saw, at Ispahan, a pillar raised to mark the spot on
which one of these tightly‐girded runners expired, in attempting to
stoop to the ground.

Scripture contains many references to this practice of girding. Thus we
read, that when the prophet Elijah accompanied the bold and wicked king,
"He girded up his loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel"
(1Ki 8:46). Even on occasions which demanded less exertion, it was usual
to gather up the garment under the girdle, lest it might incommode the
progress of the wearer. So our blessed Saviour represents the master as
addressing his servant, "Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird
thyself, and serve me till I have eaten and drunken" (Luk 17:8), and
when urging his disciples to a constant readiness for that spiritual
warfare which they must encounter, and that watchfulness which the
servants of the Lord must always exercise, he said, "Let your loins be
girded about, and your lights burning; and ye yourselves like unto men
that wait for their lord" (Luk 12:35).

This figure of girding the loins would be especially expressive to the
eastern, as well as to the ancient Greek and Roman people, among whom
the practice prevailed. With the latter, it was considered very
effeminate for a man to be seen abroad either without his girdle, or
loosely girded; and to be ungirt, became an expression of an unmanly
luxury. Sulla reproached Caesar that he was ungirt; and Maecenas was
blamed because he wore his girdle loosely.

Boothroyd renders the passage,

> She girdeth up her loins for strength,\
>  And by exercise giveth vigour to her arms;

and it very evidently implies that she preserved her health by the very
best means, that of cheerful and earnest employment. When we look at our
bodily frames, and see how they are formed for exercise; when we mark
how the muscles of the active arm are firm, and those of the indolent
soft and tender, we see something of the bodily ills to which indolence
exposes, and are convinced that a healthy frame can be preserved only by
a due attention to activity; and when we mark, too, how painful and
weary a thing sickness is, and how great is the physical enjoyment of
health, it seems strange that exercise is so much neglected by thousands
who have the means of taking it. How much exquisite enjoyment is
afforded by the mere possession of health! the pure taste, the high
spirits, which render existence itself an enjoyment and a blessing; the
good humour, the pleasure in innocent delights, the light and refreshing
sleep, the appetite which needs no dainties, the untiring footstep, and
the placid breathing, which scarcely quickens at the ascent of the
mountain. Oh, if some of those of the female sex, who now spend their
days on sofas, and their nights in unquiet dreams, would, like the
excellent woman, strengthen their arms by exercise, and gird up their
loins by some vigorous exployment, how great a change should come over
their constitutions, and how great a blessing should they gain for
themselves!

There are also higher considerations than those of mere enjoyment, which
should induce us to cultivate the means of health. To do so is a
religious duty. Health is one of the gifts which God has bestowed for
usefulness-one of those talents of which he has said, "Occupy till I
come;" and if it be wasted either by intemperance, indolence, or
carelessness, we shall have to account for it at the great and solemn
day of final retribution. If the hand of God deprive us of it, then may
we calmly say, "The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be
the name of the Lord;" and appropriate the blessed promises to
sufferers, contained in holy writ; and while we remember, that they also
serve God who only stand and wait, we may learn many blessed lessons,
when like David we can say, "Before I was afflicted I went astray; but
now have I kept thy word." But if God has given us a robust
constitution, or at least one that might, by exertion, be rendered such,
then our very sickness is a sin. "Health," says Jeremy Taylor, "is the
opportunity of wisdom, the fairest scene of religion, the advantages of
the glorification of God, and the charitable ministeries of men; it is a
state of joy and thanksgiving, and in every one of its periods feels a
pleasure from the blessed emanations of a merciful Providence. No
organs, no lute, can sound out the praises of the Almightly Father so
spritefully, as the man that rises from his bed of sorrows, and
considers what an excellent difference he feels from the groans and
intolerable accents of yesterday." Health carries us to the place of
worship, and helps us to rejoice in the communion of saints.

But though the text has an especial reference to the strengthening of
the body, yet that vigorous resolution, inculcated by the apostle Paul,
may also be intimated here." Wherefore," says the inspired writer, "gird
up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end" (1Pe 1:13). A
holy resolution, a moral courage, a steady determination in all things
to obey the voice of conscience, seems a strong feature of the character
of the Jewish woman. It is true, that no resolution made in our own
strength can avail us. Our hearts are sinful by nature, and ever ready
to depart from God and holiness. Satan, like a roaring lion, seeking
whom he may devour, is ever watching to hinder the progress of every
right resolve. The world, with its anxious cares on the one hand, and
its fascinating vanities on the other, is present with us to banish
every pious motive, and drive us into forgetfulness and sinful weakness.
Yet, unless we resolve rightly, we cannot act rightly; and there is a
way of keeping the promise made to our own hearts and to God. There is a
strength given to all who humbly ask it, in the name of the Great
Mediator; a strength to will, to do, and to endure, even to the death; a
strength, given by God, enabling the timid to be brave, and imparting a
consistent firmness, even to those who feel themselves ready to be
shaken by every breeze. But unless we seek from Heaven this consistent
firmness of principle, our goodness shall be but as the morning cloud,
and as the early dew that passeth away. Without it, no Christian course
can be a happy or a useful one. It is not enough to know and approve
what is right. Principle must be acted upon, whether the world smile or
condemn; and the diligent and steady cultivation of firmness be sought
in humble dependence on God. And as the eastern traveller girded his
garments from the dust, so, too, must Christians keep themselves
unspotted from the contamination of vain intercourse, and the defilement
of sin; and as the Hebrew matron girded herself for strength, so should
we strive to invigorate our principles by holy determination, by steady
watchfulness, and by humble prayer; so that we may say with the apostle,
"I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me" (Phl 4:13).
# Proverbs 31 Verse 18

**SHE PERCEIVETH THAT HER MERCHANDISE IS GOOD:\
 HER CANDLE GOETH NOT OUT BY NIGHT.**


The regular and constant industry for which the excellent woman is
commended, gives every reason for the conclusion that the work which she
wrought, or which she superintended, would be of a good and valuable
description. Diligence and perseverance in any pursuit give skill and
taste in its performance, and enable the worker to excel one who is
little interested in his work. Such a matron would, in time, become
known and confided in for promptness and regularity, and for durable and
beautiful workmanship; and as Boothroyd renders the passage, would see
"that her traffic is profitable." The tapestry, and girdles, and
garments, all carefully woven and beautifully ornamented, would not
disappoint the purchaser, who expected them, perhaps, to last a
life‐time; and the maker would soon gain an established reputation among
those who bought, and thus in every way her merchandise would be good.

Archbishop Cranmer renders this verse: "If she perceives that her
merchandise is good, her candle goeth not out by night." This might
signify, that if, on any particular occasion, this Jewish lady saw some
desirable objects of purchase, she and her maidens would work long and
diligently-even till night was far advanced, in order to procure it in
exchange for her manufactures. Be that as it may, however, it is no
uncommon thing, either in our own or other lands, for those engaged in
manufactures to fulfil any large order by occasionally spending even a
part of the night in its execution. In those eastern dwellings in which
stuffs are made, there is great attention to business; and It sometimes
occurs, that not only a busy group work from before the dawn till day is
over, but that parties of workers are employed through the night, one
party rising to work when the other retires to repose.

Dr. Clarke suggests that this burning of the lamp, however, implies
rather a careful vigilance than a perpetual industry, in the Hebrew
mistress. He suggests that it was probably burned on account of the
numerous banditti and lawless men, from various wandering tribes, who
might come suddenly and endanger the family during the hours of
darkness; and this caution to avert an ill, rather than to suffer it,
well corresponds with the general character given by the description of
the poem.

It appears to have been a very common practice among the ancient
Hebrews, as it is now with nations of the East, for careful persons to
burn a lamp by night in their dwellings. Candles are not burned in any
oriental country, and therefore the word thus rendered refers to the
lamp, of which we have so many notices in Scripture. Even as early as
the time of Abraham we find a "burning lamp" mentioned, which appeared
to him as a revelation from God (Gen 15:17). Gideon, when he led out his
men against the host of Midian, bade them take their lamps in their
pitchers; and from these early records of patriarchal times, even to the
days of those whose pens concluded the pages of holy writ, we find the
lamp and the oil continually referred to. Lamps were used in the
tabernacle, and at marriage festivals were hung around the room, and
cast down their light from above. Herodotus describes the lamps of the
ancient Egyptians, as "small vases, filled with salt and olive oil, in
which the wick floated and burned during the whole night;" and as this
description of the lamp exactly accords with the eastern lamp of modern
usage, it seems probable that it was also a common form of the Jewish
lamp. Many lamps, too, appear, like that of our engraving, to have had a
small handle for the convenience of removing them from place to place.
Vegetable oil of some kind, and most probably exclusively olive oil, was
burned by the Hebrews. Thus we find Moses commanding the Israelites to
prepare the lamp for the tabernacle, which was to burn from evening to
morning before the Lord: "Thou shalt command the children of Israel,
that they bring thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the
lamp to burn always" (Exd 27:20). The wicks of the lamps were made of
the coarser fibres of flax; and the Rabbins record, that the old linen
garments of the priests were unravelled, to furnish those of the sacred
lamps in the tabernacle.

The general use of the lamp naturally made it a frequent subject of
metaphor and simile among ancient writers. Thus the wise man says, "The
light of the righteous rejoiceth; but the lamp of the wicked shall be
put out" (Pro 13:9); and again, the sudden extinction of the lamp served
as a figure to express the wrath of God against him who cursed father or
mother; for "his lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness" (Pro 20:20).
Many writers think that the expression "outer darkness," often used in
Scripture, refers to the contrast of the outward darkness of night, when
compared with that of the chamber in which it was so customary for the
light to be burning. Our Saviour, addressing those who were accustomed
to the highly poetic imagery of the East, spoke of the professor of
piety under the figure of a lamp; and in the well‐known and beautiful
parable of the wise and foolish virgins, showed the danger of a careless
and unwatchful profession of religion, commanding his followers to have
their lights always burning.

In all ages, the lamp beaming from the chamber window on the dimness and
gloom of the outward world, has awakened pleasurable and poetic
associations in the mind of the traveller; and whether we are attracted
by the small light of a cottage candle, seen from afar, or the still
fainter lustre of an eastern lamp, yet our minds form some picture of
the home within. The writer of the book of Proverbs, whose eye might
rest on such a lamp, would imagine a home of industrious application. To
him it would speak of care and vigilance, of the mistress and maidens
gathered round it at their work; of children striving to lend a helping
hand; and of a domestic scene of cheerful employment. To all of us such
a lamp might seem like the hope which burns in the breast of one who
loves and fears God. Now, perhaps, it burns feebly: some passing object
dims its brightness, and suggests the idea of the worldly anxiety, or
the sinful infirmity, which shadows that hope in the human bosom. Again,
it rises into abright and steady flame, cheering and gladdening all
around it; and so the Christian's hope, soaring above these passing
shadows, burns with its holy and life‐giving lustre, shining brighter
and brighter, till that perfect day of pure and unshadowed light.
Perhaps it was after wandering in some lonely spot in the dimness of
night, that David came upon some household lamp, and exclaimed as it
guided him onwards, "Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto
my path" (Psa 119:105); and while he blessed God for his holy word,
added, "Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterwards receive me
to glory" (Psa 73:24). Our blessed Saviour said to his disciples, "Ye
are the light of the world" (Mat 5:14), and bade them, and us for whom
also his blessed words were spoken and afterwards written, so to let our
light, shine before men, that they, seeing our good works, might glorify
our Father which is in heaven.
# Proverbs 31 Verse 19

**SHE LAYETH HER HANDS TO THE SPINDLE,\
 AND HER HANDS HOLD THE DISTAFF.**


Had not the sacred writer further enlarged upon the character of this
woman, had this single praise been uttered of her, it would, to those
for whom it was immediately intended, be of itself a high commendation.
The Rabbins record an old saying of the Hebrews, that there is no wisdom
in a woman but in the distaff; implying, as do the words of the text,
that a woman's great praise is her industry. The Greeks and Romans would
have accorded fully with the implied sentiment. When a Roman lady became
a bride, she received many a hint from the marriage ceremony, that she
was about to enter on active domestic employment; and again and again,
the word *thalassio* resounded on her ear. This word, which signified
the vessel in which were kept the materials for spinning, and the work
already spun, reminded her, not only of the spindle and the distaff, to
which it might directly refer, but was also significant of the various
household occupations, in which the women of ancient days felt it their
duty and their honour to excel.

> In those old times,\
>  There was far less of gadding, and far more\
>  Of home‐born, heart‐felt comfort, rooted strong\
>  In industry, and bearing such rare fruit\
>  As wealth might never purchase."

It was not until the more degenerate days of Rome, when luxury had
supplanted the habits of the older state of society, that spinning and
weaving were left to the slave. In earlier times, the bride went to her
new home amid the throng of rejoicing maidens; and the young attendants
carried in their hands the distaff and the spindle, with the
gay‐coloured wools hanging about them;-to all it spoke the same
lesson-the lesson so often inculcated by the Roman writers, that a woman
should resemble the bee for industry, and imitate Minerva, whose wisdom
was so truly womanly in its direction, that she was said to be the first
who ever wrought a web.

It was the pride of Augustus Caesar, that his imperial robes, his
fringed tunic, and costly girdle, were wrought in his household, by the
hands of his wife, his sister, his daughter, and his grand‐daughters.
So, too, Alexander the Great, when advising the mother of Darius to
teach her nieces to imitate the Grecian ladies in spinning wool, showed
her the garments which he wore, and told her they were made by his
sisters. The virtuous Lucretia worked with her maidens at the
spinning‐wheel; and Tanaquil, the wife of Tarquin, wrought woollen robes
so well, that long after her death, her spinning implements, together
with a robe of her manufacture, were hung up in the Temple of Fortune; a
constant monument of her taste and skill, and an intimation to Roman
maids and matrons, that they, too, should lay their hands to the
spindle, and their hands should hold the distaff.

The Jewish Scriptures so frequently refer to the industry of women in
occupations of this kind, that one can easily imagine the matron,

> "At her wheel.\
>  Spinning amain, as if to overtake\
>  The never‐halting time; or, in her turn,\
>  Teaching some novice of the sisterhood\
>  Her skill in this or other household work."

The ancient spindle or spinning‐wheel was held by the right hand, and
turned round, while the distaff or staff around which the wool was
rolled was held in the bend of the left arm, and the thread drawn over
the fingers of the left hand, so that both hands were employed.

The spindle and the distaff are the most ancient form of the spinning
apparatus, and, in an improved condition, were long used even in our own
country; hence the word spinster; and the English maiden or mother might
often be seen sitting at her wheel

> In summer, ere the mower was abroad\
>  Among the dewy grass-in early spring,\
>  Ere the last star had vanished."

But time has brought its wondrous improvements and great changes, and
the well‐constructed spinning machinery of modern days has banished from
our cottage‐doors the busy hum of the wheel. The cottager who once
turned it gaily round, has now to change her mode of industry, and has
only to make up with her needle, into garments, the fabric which she
would once have manufactured for herself.

But besides the actual spinning or weaving of the wool and flax, the
preparation of these substances gave much employment to the Jewish
household. The flax required drying and preparing for use. The wool,
after being combed, and picked, and carded, was put up, in round balls,
ready for the spindle. It was sometimes left for use with the natural
moisture which fresh‐cut wool always yields, and which reminds us of the
wool of Gideon's fleeces, out of which, in the Syrian climate, he could
wring dew, "even a bowl full of water" (Jdg 6:38). Wool in this state
was called plump‐wool; but when the manufacturers were about to make
some, of those brilliant garments, whose tints no modern skill can
furnish, the wool had to be subjected to the various processes of
dyeing. In this case it was usual to anoint the wool with wine, or with
some unctuous substance, preparatory to plunging it into the dye.
# Proverbs 31 Verse 20

**SHE STRETCHETH OUT HER HAND TO THE POOR;\
 YEA, SHE REACHETH FORTH HER HANDS TO THE NEEDY.**


It would be impossible for any reader of the Holy Scriptures not to see
how careful the great Jehovah has been, both under the old and new
dispensation, to recommend to the care of the rich, the wants of their
poorer brethren. The law of Moses abounded in humane institutions
respecting the poor, and these would be familiar to the Jewish woman.
Though her Bible had not the Gospels, with their illustrations of the
living and dying love of the Redeemer; though the sacred volume of the
ancient Hebrew told not of the self‐denying zeal of St. Paul, or other
holy men of old, who lived and laboured and suffered for others; though
it had not the gentle and affectionate tenderness of the lovely and
beloved disciple, yet its law made provision for kindness and humanity;
and the poor and the destitute, the fatherless and the widow, were ever
described as the peculiar objects of God's love and compassion, and were
recommended to the care of those to whom God had given wealth. "Blessed
is he that considereth the poor: the Lord will deliver him in time of
trouble" (Psa 41:1) had been sung by the psalmist; and still the words
resounded in the tabernacle of the righteous, and still were met by
answering feelings, in the hearts of those who loved and feared Israel's
God. It was in the exact spirit of the Divine law, that this woman
acted: Moses had said, "The poor shall never cease out of the land:
therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt open thine hand wide unto
thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy land" (Deu 15:11).

There is something very expressive in the figure of the text: "She
stretcheth out her hand to the poor; yea, she reacheth forth her hands
to the needy." It would seem to imply an attention to the wants of the
poor, not forced upon her by immediate neighbourhood. She waited not for
the poor man to come to her door, but she went out to look for him. She
did not deal out her bounty grudgingly, and by slow degrees, but gave
with bounteous hands, and anticipated the duty taught afterwards:
"Freely ye have received, freely give." She might have been seen, like
Dorcas, making clothing for the poor, and distributing it with cheerful
and willing kindness. She knew well that God loveth a cheerful giver.
She was described as a woman "who feared the Lord," and his commands
were her standard of duty. She would feel that the destitute ought to
have a portion in all riches, so that God's blessing might rest on the
wealth which she had gained. Such a woman could appreciate the kind and
considerate command of her holy law, so suited to the agricultural
habits of the people of a rich and fertile land: "When thou cuttest down
thine harvest in thy field and hast forgot a sheaf in the field, thou
shalt not go again to fetch it: it shall be for the stranger, for the
fatherless, and for the widow; that the Lord thy God may bless thee in
all the works of thine hands. When thou beatest thine olive‐tree, thou
shalt not go over the boughs again; it shall be for the stranger, for
the fatherless, and for the widow. When thou gatherest the grapes of thy
vineyard, thou shalt not glean it afterwards; it shall be for the
stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow" (Deu 24:19-21). And
whether it were the gleanings of her harvest field, or the wool of her
flock, it was given with gladness. The poor who were near her rejoiced
in her bounty, and the poor afar off were not forgotten. Even so may we
see the ripplings of the waters around the pebble which is cast into the
stream; and the ridges of water are fuller and larger nearest to the
stone, and though they lessen as they recede, yet they form widening
circles still, until they enclose the whole lake: just so were the deeds
of love wrought by this woman, fullest in the charities of home, yet
widening ever, until they encompassed the whole world in their embrace.

Dr. Adam Clarke considers the expression "needy," as applying especially
to the afflicted poor. The poor whom sickness prevented from labour; the
aged man whose limbs refused to bear the weight of toil; the little
child, too young to help himself; or the houseless stranger, who came to
the gate of the Israelitish city to ask for succour-the latter had been
especially commended to the pity of the ancient Hebrew: "Love ye
therefore the stranger," said the Lord to his chosen people; "for ye
were strangers in the land of Egypt" (Deu 10:19). And he whom adverse
circumstances had brought low, was cared for in the humane precepts of
the law. "If thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee,
then thou shalt relieve him: yea, though he be a stranger or a
sojourner; that he may live with thee" (Lev 25:35).

If we find it commanded as a duty, and named as a praise, of the Hebrew
woman, that she reached forth her hands to the poor and needy, how much
more should this kindness to the indigent be expected of women reared in
a country, in which the gentle and loving spirit of the gospel is fully
known! The ancient duty of remembering the poor, so far from being
abrogated by the New Testament, is enforced by more numerous and direct
commands, and by the living example of our blessed Saviour, who "went
about doing good" (Act 10:38).

One thing which must ever endear to the Christian his poorer brethren,
is the remembrance that Jesus Christ himself was the member of a poor
family. The disciple of the Lord, who had not where to lay his head, and
who was supplied by the kind women who ministered to him, should feel a
sincere pity and regard for the poor, for verily the Lord of glory took
not upon him the nature of an angel; he came not with wealth or power,
but made himself of no reputation, and for more than thirty years
endured poverty and privation, that we might have everlasting happiness;
that to the poor the gospel might be preached, and that they might be
made "rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom." In all the solemn and
affectionate appeals made in God's holy word in behalf of the poor,
there is not one which comes home more fully than this to the heart of
God's children: "For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that,
though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through
his poverty might be rich" (2Cr 8:9). Oh! if we could ever remember how
short our time is for doing good, that our sun may go down suddenly,
while it is yet day; that if even the threescore years and ten of this
mortal life should be allotted to us, it will be too short for half our
projects, surely we should hasten to‐day to labour in God's vineyard;
making sacrifices of time, and talents, and property, for the poor and
needy of God's heritage; and labouring diligently ere the night cometh,
when no man can work.

Nor must it be forgotten, that on a Christian devolves the duty, not
only of doing good to the body, but to the soul. Every one who has
himself received the gift of God's Spirit-whose sins are pardoned
through the Redeemer's grace, is bound to study and promote the eternal
welfare of others. Woe be to us, if our poorer brethren shall say at the
day of judgment, "No man cared for my soul!" If we have the tongue of
the learned, and can give good instruction, yet forbear to give it; if
we can help the ignorant with a word of counsel; if we can bestow upon
him the word of life, or induce him to join the assembly of God's
earthly worshippers on the Sabbath day; if we can set before him a holy
example; if we can send the missionary to the crowded alleys of our
cities, or help him to traverse the wide waters to the dim and dark
recesses of ignorance and cruelty,-and yet sloth, or carelessness, or
self‐indulgence, or parsimony, lead us to inertness; then we are robbing
those whom God has given into our care, and God will require their souls
at our hands. But if we stretch out our hands to the needy, then may we
hope for God's promised blessing, and our own spiritual wants will be
supplied while we are aiding others.

There is also a peculiar feature in love to the poor, which is impressed
on the doctrines of the New Testament with greater distinctness than on
those of the Old. Besides the general commands to love our poorer
neighbour, we are especially "to do good to them who are of the
household of faith" (Gal 6:10). So much is this love to the disciples of
Christ inculcated in the writings of the evangelists and apostles, that
we are told we ought to "lay down our lives for the brethren" (1Jo
3:16). It is even made a test of our love to God. "Whoso hath this
world's good," saith St. John, "and seeth his brother have need, and
shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of
God in him?" (1Jo 3:17). The contributions for the poor saints were not
forgotten by the apostle Paul and the early Christians; and while it is
the duty of Christians to do good to the bodies and to the souls of all,
to stretch out the willing hand to the poor and needy, the poor of God's
adopted family should be the especial objects of their love and care.
# Proverbs 31 Verse 21

**SHE IS NOT AFRAID OF THE SNOW FOR HER HOUSEHOLD;\
 FOR ALL HER HOUSEHOLD ARE CLOTHED WITH SCARLET.**


We are so accustomed to hear of the serene skies and genial warmth of
the climate of Palestine, that we are, in our thoughts, apt to invest
that interesting land with a perpetual sunshine. The flowery heights of
the fragrant Carmel; the magnificent and enduring vegetation of Lebanon;
the smiling plains of the still lovely and verdant Sharon; the grapes of
Eshcol-these are the features of the landscape most familiar to our
mind. Although the cold of winter is not so severe as in some other
parts of Syria, still it is scarcely less than that experienced in our
own country. The autumnal shower is the early rain, for which the
"husbandman long waited," that he might sow his seed: and in December,
which is the first winter month, the rain falls in torrents, and the
snow covers the plains occasionally, and lies on the elevated mountains
long after spring has made considerable advance; while hoar‐frost
scatters its diamonds, or a mist, like that of our northern climates,
obscures the face of nature.

Owing to the great inequalities of surface in the Holy Land, there are
some sheltered and favoured spots which are free from the cold of
winter. Here the season is soft and mild, snow is seldom seen on the
plains, and the orange‐tree and the citron, and the goodly palm,
contrast with the white summits and glittering icicles of Lebanon. On
the mountains the snow is peculiarly deep from December, and scarcely
decreases before the month of July. Dr. E. D. Clarke, speaking of one of
the hills which forms a part of the majestic Lebanon, says: "The snow
entirely covers the upper part of it; not lying in patches, as I have
seen it, during summer, upon the tops of very elevated mountains, for
instance that of Ben Nevis in Scotland; but investing all the higher
part, with that perfect white and smooth velvet‐like appearance, which
snow only exhibits when it is very deep: a striking spectacle in such a
climate, where the beholder, seeking protection from a burning sun,
almost considers the firmament to be on fire."

We have various other instances in Scripture, besides that quoted at the
head of the chapter, of the cold and snow of Palestine. The psalmist of
Israel sung of the fleeces which the Creator "giveth like wool," and
prayed that he might be purified and made "whiter than snow." We infer
the cold from the statement of the prophet Jeremiah, when he described
Jehoiakim, king of Judah, as sitting with his nobles around the hearth,
and daringly cutting with his penknife, and casting into the fire, the
scroll which contained the denunciations of the Almighty. So again, in
that sad hour, when the affectionate but frail apostle denied the Master
whom he loved, we read that they had kindled a fire in the midst of the
hall, and that Peter and others sat down together by it, "for it was
cold."

The writer of the "Pictorial Palestine," describing the severe weather
of January, says: "Major Skinner, who states that he traversed this
country in a season unusually severe, speaks much of snow and cold. He
mentions a village under Mount Carmel, in which many houses had been
destroyed by the great quantities of snow which had fallen. He spent a
night in that village, and on the morning of the twenty‐eighth, found
the court‐yard full of snow, which had fallen during the night. Snow was
then resting on the ridge of Mount Carmel. Penetrating to the interior
of the country, the same traveller reached Nazareth on the thirtieth.
The heights around the town, and many of the houses, were covered with
snow; large heaps of which were piled up in the court‐yard of the
convent. Many of the smaller houses had been destroyed by it; and the
next day he found that the deep snow in the streets rendered it
impossible to quit the city, and difficult to move about in it. A thaw
had, however, commenced. The snow falls thick, and lies long on the
mountains and high and intervening plains and valleys of Jebel Haouran,
which may be said to bound eastward the country beyond Jordan. Madox
found it so at the end of January. The same traveller, on the
thirteenth, found Damascus covered with snow, as well as the mountains
and plains round it."

Most commentators think that the Hebrew word rendered "scarlet," would
be more correctly translated by the marginal reading, "double garments."
It is thus rendered by Boothroyd in his version of Scripture, and the
Septuagint and Arabic versions give it thus. The twice dyeing, which
formed part of the process used in obtaining the brilliant scarlet of
the East, caused this colour to be expressed in the original language,
by the verb to redouble, and thus leaves the rendering in some measure
doubtful. Dr. Adam Clarke states, in his commentary, that his old
manuscript Bible renders this part of the passage "ben clothed with
double;" and adds that Coverdale, with equal propriety, translates it,
"For all hir household folkes are duble clothed." Whether we regard this
double clothing as relating to an additional number of garments, put on
during the winter season; or whether we consider it as relating to a
double stock of clothes, suitable for the winter, as well as the summer,
it still marks the care of her household shown by the mistress and the
mother.

There are, however, some commentators who consider scarlet as the right
rendering of the word from the original. Dr. Gill remarks, that if the
word here used had been designed to be "double," it would have been in
the dual number; and as this is not the case, he considers that in this,
and similar instances, it is used for the scarlet colour. He adds that
both the Targum and Aben Ezra thus interpret it.

Supposing the word scarlet to be the correct translation in this
passage, it would refer to the clothing provided by the Jewish matron
for her husband and children only, and would not include the dress of
her servants. Scarlet was a colour much esteemed in the East, and the
Jewish nobles and courtiers were accustomed, on state occasions and
festivals, to wear robes of this brilliant dye. In that exquisitely
touching lament, uttered by David over the fallen king, he exclaims, "Ye
daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with
other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel" (2Sa
1:24). So, too, Belshazzar was decked in the robe of scarlet; and when
the prophet meant to contrast the wealth and luxury of Israel with its
deepest degradation, he said, "They that were brought up in scarlet
embrace dunghills" (Lam 5:5). And now, in the land endeared to us by
holiest associations, the bright colouring of the scarlet robe still
attracts the eye of the traveller, in the winter season; and Lamartine
speaks of the picturesque scarlet mantles of the Druses of Lebanon, and
of the brilliant vests of scarlet velvet sometimes adopted by the Arab
women.

If we keep to the latter rendering of the word, the passage would leave
us simply to infer, that as the ordinary clothing of the family was that
of the wealthier classes, there would not fail to be a provision of warm
raiment prepared for the inclement season.

The ancient scarlet appears to have been sometimes a vegetable dye,
obtained from the berries of a tree common in Canaan, and at others to
have been procured from an insect, resembling the American cochineal,
though of a less brilliant tint. This insect, which was found chiefly on
the leaves of the evergreen oak (*ilex aculeata*), was called by the
Greeks and Romans *coccus*, but by the Arabs *kermes*, and from this
latter word we derive our *crimson* and *carmine*. This scarlet dye is
supposed to have been common in Egypt before the time of Moses, and to
have been brought by the Israelites from that land. It is considered by
most writers to be the scarlet named among the colours of the hangings
of the tabernacle, by the cunning (or skilful) workman and embroiderer
(Exd 35:35).

In the national character of the Hebrews, we can, through all ages,
perceive the virtue of forethought-a characteristic which appears the
more striking if we contrast it with the carelessness of the future
exhibited by our warm‐hearted neighbours, the Irish, or with the love of
mere present gratification which marks the people of some continental
nations. In the long series of cruel and oppressive acts, to which, in
comparatively modern times, the ancient people of God have been
subjected, this forethought has, in many instances, degenerated into a
spirit of covetousness; and the love of hoarding has been censured in
the Jew, by the very men whose rapacious tyranny turned this
characteristic virtue into a vice. But the bright example of this pious
woman, as portrayed by the Hebrew writer, under the direct inspiration
of the Holy Spirit of God, is not that of a mean selfishness, not

> That strict parsimony\
>  Which sternly hoarded all that could be spared\
>  From each day's need, out of each day's least gain:"

\
 \
 hers was an enlarged and bounteous providence, one which, while it
sought to guard against the ills, and provided for the comforts of the
coming days, while it gathered for her family enough and to spare, yet
could have an open hand for the poor and needy. She acted on the
principle of the charge given by the wise man to the sluggard, when he
bade him consider the ways of the ant, "which provideth her meat in the
summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest." She could give liberally
to those who had nothing, while she avoided the censure afterwards
pronounced by the apostle, "If any provide not for his own, and
specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is
worse than an infidel" (1Ti 5:8). We have sometimes need to be reminded,
that prodigality is not generosity; that there is a prudent care for
ourselves and others, which may consist in economising present
provision, so as to afford future comfort: and which is, as in the
beautiful illustration of womanly virtue now before us, the result of a
generous and enlarged thoughtfulness, which forgets not to consider the
poor, nor neglects the enjoyment of present good.\
 \

Prudence is that necessary part of wisdom, which while it adapts its
means to the end, refers chiefly to the prevention of ill. In looking to
the future, we must see that evil of one kind or other waits us, if not
met by a careful prudence. Even the warm and pleasant days of
Palestine-its myrtles and roses-its many‐tinted hues of sky-all had to
yield to the winter's snows, and coldness, and barrenness; and thus it
is with our life itself. The "prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth
himself: but the simple pass on, and are punished" (Pro 22:3); and the
wretched fate of the imprudent man, whose want of consideration for the
future leads him to poverty and ruin, is too often before us to be
forgotten. But there is a worse evil to be prepared for than mere
earthly poverty, and cold, and want, and suffering. Death is in itself
an evil. Even the apostle could say, when speaking of the disunion of
soul and body, "Not for that we would be unclothed" (2Cr 5:4). And if
the Christian naturally shrinks from the prospect of death, though his
life has been a preparation for heaven, and he knows that God will be
with him in dying, oh! how fearful must it be to him, who in life never
looked forward to his dying hour! The infidel is an imprudent man, for
he hideth himself not from coming evil, but boldly defies the wintry
hour of life. The worldly man is imprudent, for he sends forward no
careful thought into the long future; and though even our ages are but
as a few waves from the great sea of Eternity, which ebb back again into
the boundless ocean, yet he lives as if all our interests belonged to
Time. The profligate man who despises God, and loses in the sense of
present gratification all consciousness of the evil which lies beyond,
laments bitterly on his dying bed his neglect of the duty of
forethought.

Forethought, however, must be distinguished from foreboding; that
cheerful calculation on future events, and providing against the
vicissitudes of life, which are exemplified in the text, are wholly
different from the dread of coming evil, the anxiety about sorrows which
may never happen, which arises from a mistrust of the providence of God.
Some people build castles in the air; others seem intent on building
dungeons. The over‐anxious mind is distrustful, and makes its owner
miserable, when he ought calmly and happily to wait on God, and rely on
his promises. To such might be applied the words of the poet:

> "Does each day upon its wing\
>  Its allotted burden bring?\
>  Load it not beside with sorrow\
>  Which belongeth to the morrow.\
>  Strength is promised-strength is given\
>  When the heart by God is riven:\
>  But foredate the day of woe,\
>  And alone thou bear'st the blow."

# Proverbs 31 Verse 22

**SHE MAKETH HERSELF COVERINGS OF TAPESTRY;\
 HER CLOTHING IS SILK AND PURPLE.**


It has ever been, in the East, customary for persons of wealth to dress
in magnificent clothing, and to furnish their dwellings in a sumptuous
and tasteful manner. There is indeed but little furniture in an oriental
house. Couches and sofas, and hangings at the doors, are almost the only
objects on which skill can be exercised, or which will admit the display
of wealth in the possessor. In such a condition of society, it was
certainly the duty of the wife of a Jewish magistrate, both to dress
herself, and to array her house, in a style becoming the place and time.
Had she done otherwise, she would have neglected the duties of her
station, exposed her husband to censure, and herself have borne the
reputation of a careless housewife. While to be clothed in silk and
purple would be no praise of the modern female, in her it was
significant of that sense of propriety which, in all ages, especially
becomes the feminine character. The same duty of making home
comfortable, of providing suitable furniture and clothing for the
family, and of dressing according to her station, is practised by the
excellent woman of modern times; and she who is not attired with a
woman's neatness, and is indifferent even to the appearance of her house
and family, has no claim to the reputation of a good wife, nor can she
expect that her children will rise up and call her blessed.

The coverings of tapestry named in this passage refer probably to those
embroidered quilted coverlets used in all parts of Asia for the divan or
sofa. They might, however, signify carpets for her guests to sit upon;
or those richly worked curtains often hung at the oriental door‐way, to
keep the warm rays of the sun from entering the apartment; and which,
separating the room from the beautiful garden into which it opens, yet
admit the soft wind laden with odours from shrubs and flowers. It seems
most likely that these coverings of tapestry were worked with the
needle, for although in very early days the Greeks and Romans used the
loom in embroidering their tapestries, yet the practice of working by
the needle was not only earlier, but was continued long after the
introduction of the loom, and indeed to comparatively modern times. The
Hebrews derived their skill in this art from the Egyptians, and, among
this people, either the loom or the hand was employed in this kind of
manufacture. Until within the last few centuries much female skill and
ingenuity have been bestowed on the working of tapestry, of which the
celebrated Bayeux tapestry is a well‐known instance. This piece of
needlework, wrought either by the hand of Matilda, the wife of the
Norman Conqueror, or worked by her maidens under her direction, is a
standing monument of feminine perseverance. It is twenty inches wide,
and two hundred and fourteen long. It is worked in woollen threads, and
resembles a large sampler: portraying, in figures somewhat uncouth, the
various events connected with the Norman Conquest.

The curtains of the Jewish Tabernacle described in the book of Exodus
26-27, "made of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet,"
are generally supposed to have been made of needlework, in which the
Jewish women are known to have excelled. Some of these curtains had
precious stones, and wires of gold worked in among the threads, as we
see in the "clothes of service," and "holy garments," described by
Moses. "And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into
wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet,
and in the fine linen, with cunning work" (Exd 39:33). That pictures
describing various scenes of life or landscape were traced by female
hands on their tapestries, there can be little doubt. Archbishop Cranmer
translates the first and second verses of Exodus 26 (Exd 26:1-2): "Thou
shalt make curtaynes of whyte twyned silke, yelowe sylke, purple and
scarlet. And in them thou shalt make pyctures of broidered work." The
celebrated Babylonian tapestries were wrought with the needle, and
represented either the mysteries of religion, or some historical
incidents; and the Greek and Roman ladies wrought embroideries, which
told to the eye a tale of hunting or war, of love or sorrow, and even in
those early days wove tapestry, little inferior to that which graces the
halls of some of our old English castles and mansions.

The taste for brilliant colouring, so marked among the people of the
East, seems a natural consequence of the bright hue of nature in the
lands in which they reside; and the sober tints of our colder climate
may have had their effect in moderating that taste in our own land. In
countries in which the flowers are so brilliant, that the flame itself
seems hardly to exceed their brightness; where insects of ruby colour or
of brightest emerald unfold their wings; and birds varying in tint from
every shade of purple to faintest azure fly among the trees, there is a
depth of richness of colouring to which our eye is unaccustomed. The
amethyst sky at sunset; the very mountain peaks, tinged as they are, in
some eastern lands, with hues of rose and violet, and orange-

> "For God has set his rainbows on them, while the cloud\
>  Lies at their feet:"

These, when seen constantly, tend to impart to the taste a love for the
bright and gorgeous tints which God has sent to colour this earthly
home. Blue, in every variety, was a favourite colour with the ancient
Hebrews. We find it mentioned continually in the decoration of the
Tabernacle, and the dress of the priest; and it is generally thought to
have been procured from indigo, which appears from the mummy cloths to
have been used by the Egyptians, and was therefore doubtless known to
the Jews. It is rather remarkable, that in modern times this colour is
not esteemed in Palestine, nor admired as it once was, but has become
connected with the idea of meanness, and worn only by the poorest of the
people. But the purple was the colour which appears to have had
pre‐eminence in ancient times, and which was so generally appropriated
to kings and important personages, that even unto modern days the purple
robe is emblematic of royalty. At a period early as that when Israel was
ruled by judges, we find mention of this colour, as worn by royal
persons; and on that eventful day,

> "When grove was felled, and altar was cast down,\
>  And Gideon blew the trumpet, soul‐inflamed,\
>  And strong in hatred of idolatry"-

the kings of Midian appeared "clothed in purple raiment" (Jdg 8:26). It
was, too, with the purple robe that Mordecai was decked, when he was
promoted to honour by the Persian king; and to be clothed in purple and
fine linen, was the distinction of the rich man in the parable of the
New Testament.

The purple mentioned in the text, is believed by most writers to be the
highly valued Tyrian dye. This colour was known in very ancient times,
and prized, not only by the Hebrews, but by the Greeks and Romans. It
was procured from two species of fish found on the shores of the
Mediterranean and Atlantic seas: the one (*buccinum*) adhered to the
rocks; the other (*purpura*) floated in the sea, and it was this species
which afforded the dye most in request, and which is called in the
Apocrypha, the purple of the sea. From various varieties of these two
species of shell‐fish several tints of purple were obtained. The one was
of a paler hue, and more resembling our scarlet; another was a deep
violet tint, a colour much valued by the Roman ladies in the time of
Augustus; but the hue most admired was that deep purplish crimson, which
resembles clotted blood. This is said by Mr. Harmer to be the most
sublime of all earthly colours, "having the gaudiness of red, of which
it retains a shade, softened with the gravity of blue."

We can form some idea of the expensive nature of Tyrian purples, when we
consider how large a number of shell‐fish must be collected to furnish
even a small quantity of the dye. These fish were sometimes two feet in
length, but the only portion which yielded the colour was a small white
vein in the neck, so that a number of fishermen must have been employed,
for many days, before they could obtain enough to colour even a single
garment. The art of dyeing the Tyrian purple is now lost, but it is
probable that its place is well supplied by the rich hues of vegetable
dyes employed in modern times.

The Rev. A. Bonar and Robert M'Cheyne, who lately visited the Holy Land,
on a mission of inquiry respecting the Jews, remark of the shore near
the Bay of Acre: "We saw some of our neighbours seeking for specimens of
the shell‐fish, from which in ancient times used to be extracted the
famous purple dye. We did not find any specimens, but were told it is
still to be found there. It used to be found in all parts of the Bay,
and there were two kinds of it. One of these yielded a dark blue colour,
the other a brighter tint, like scarlet; and by mingling these two
juices, the true purple colour was obtained." "It was thus," adds the
writer, "that Asher, whose rich and beautiful plain supplied viands fit
for the table of kings, yielded also the dye of their royal robes,
conveyed to many a distant coast by the merchants of Tyre and Sidon; and
thus we see the full meaning of Jacob's blessing on Asher, 'he shall
yield royal dainties.'"

The great use of the purple colour among the wealthy classes of the
Hebrews gave employment to many of the Tyrian merchants. Thus we find
that when Ezekiel addressed Tyrus, in the language of prophecy, he
referred to it: "Syria was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of
the wares of thy making: they occupied in thy fairs with emeralds,
purple, and broidered work" (Eze 27:16). In later ages, we read of a
very interesting character, Lydia, who was "a seller of purple" at
Thyatira, whose "heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the
things which were spoken of Paul," and whose warm and earnest love to
the apostle and his companions, urged her to constrain them to dwell in
her house (Act 16:14-15); and this rich colour, in which the matron of
the text is said to be clothed, was probably one of those species of
merchandise which she is said, "like the merchants' ships, to have
brought from afar."
# Proverbs 31 Verse 23

**HER HUSBAND IS KNOWN IN THE GATES\
 WHEN HE SITTETH AMONG THE ELDERS OF THE LAND.**

It is indeed a high praise of a woman, that her husband should be known
and honoured for her sake; that in the places of public resort he should
be recognised as the husband of a wife, who so arranged the household
duties, and took so practical a part in the concerns of the family, that
he was enabled to devote his time to public business. His dress, too,
ever becoming his station, and wrought with industrious skill in his own
home, would be noticed in an oriental assembly; while an unspotted
reputation, gained by a virtuous and consistent life, reflected its
lustre on all connected with the Jewish women.

And as it was in the days of old, so is it now, that whatever position
in life we may occupy, we cannot, stand alone. Whether individual
conduct bring disgrace, or win respect, others must share in it. So,
too, we all must influence others; and of all means of moral influence,
none is greater than that of a good reputation. Without it, indeed, all
good influence is lost. The Scripture proverb says, "A good name is
rather to be chosen than precious ointment;" and for the preservation of
this good name, a woman's conduct must not only be marked by integrity
and simplicity, but it must be steady and uniform. The very shadow of
ill, the very appearance of evil, is to be shunned by every woman
professing godliness; and in the eye of the world she should be
blameless, approving herself not only unto God, but also unto men.

When we find it implied that a woman's character brought an honour to
her husband, we are quite sure that it was marked by consistency. This
can be the result only of the possession of good principles, and of a
determination, by the grace of God, to make these principles the basis,
not only of every important duty, but of the lesser acts of life. It
must proceed from a high and enlarged sense of responsibility, and was
never yet attained by any who had not seriously studied her own
particular duties, and cultivated also the duty of firmness. We all rely
fully on a consistent person, and instinctively value his opinion. Every
one must have seen that there are some, who without attempting to gain
influence over others, yet possess it to so great a degree, that even
vice stands abashed in their presence: the swearer will fear to utter
his oath; the drunkard will feel ashamed of his sin; and the frivolous
will stay his folly. Even the little child recognises consistency, and
feels the force of reproof or praise uttered by its possessor. It is
remarkable, too, that our characters are generally read fairly, and well
understood by those around us. Weight of character never fails to make
its due impression. We are judged, not only by the expression of our
sentiments-for in these we might deceive-but by the hourly acts which
make up human life, the impulse which prompts the unconsidered word, the
very look which betrays the thought; the little things, which, in their
individual manifestation, seem nothing, yet the amount of which make up
our character and cause it to be rightly read.

The ancient custom of holding meetings for public justice under the
gateway of the town, as well as the reference to the elders, leads us to
the conclusion, that the husband of the Jewish woman held some office of
public trust. As early as the time of Abraham, we find business
transactions performed in the gate, when the patriarch purchased the
cave of Machpelah, in the audience of the children of Heth; and the
silver was weighed in the presence of all them that went in at the gate
of the city (Gen 23:10-16). And Boaz bought of Naomi the land of his
family, in the presence of the witnesses at the gateway, and of the
elders (Rth 4:9). The convenience of the gate, as being not only a
regular place of thoroughfare in and out of the city, but a public place
of resort, rendered it peculiarly suitable for the transfer of property,
at a time when written documents were little known, and the transaction
had consequently to be attested by several of the inhabitants of the
neighbourhood. Homer states of the Trojans, that their elders assembled
in the gate to judge of the rights between man and man.

In the law of Moses we find direct reference to the practice of holding
law‐courts in these entrances to towns. "Judges and officers shalt thou
make thee in all thy gates, which the Lord thy God giveth thee,
throughout thy tribes: and they shall judge the people with just
judgment" (Deu 16:18). And when Job looked back on more prosperous days,
and compared with them his state of present sorrow, he says: "When I
went out to the gate through the city, when I prepared my seat in the
street: the young men saw me, and hid themselves: and the aged arose,
and stood up:" (Job 29:7-8), while the mournful Jeremiah predicted as
one of the signs of desolation on his native land, that the elders
should cease from the gate.

But besides the business of judging the people of Israel, and of
conveying estates or other property, the gateway was often a
market‐place; and there were assembled the merchants who trafficked in
the various goods of the East. Thus we find Elisha announcing to the
famished people of Samaria, "To‐morrow shall a measure of fine flour be
sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, in the gate
of Samaria" (2Ki 7:1).

It can easily be imagined that a place of such great concourse would
become a resort, not only for men of business, but for men of leisure;
and the oriental gateway held the same place in the town, which is now
occupied by the coffee‐house. There neighbours met to talk over the
affairs of the city, to speak of the past, and to speculate on the
future; to dwell on the faults of their fellow townsmen, or to expatiate
on their worth. If any man wished to meet with his neighbour, he went up
to the gateway; if he had public news to communicate, he carried it
thither. If he wished to attract the notice, or to win the ear of the
governor of the city, he would sit day by day, as Mordecai did, in the
king's gate. So, too, we find Isaiah speaking of him "that reproveth in
the gate" (Isa 29:21); and Jeremiah delivered his solemn warnings and
commands "in the gate of the children of the people" (Jer 17:19); and it
was when the psalmist felt that he had become the object of the unjust
reproaches of his neighbours, that he said, "They that sit in the gate
speak against me." (Psa 69:12)

It does not appear that the assembly of people who thus met in the
gateway formed any hinderance to the passing of the townspeople in and
out of the city. In eastern gateways, in the present day, there is a
slightly raised seat on both sides of the arch; and, under the pleasant
shadow of the wall, the man of the East still lounges and chats, and
receives company. Such accommodation no doubt belonged to the Hebrew
gate. There are, besides, on each side of some gateways open rooms or
cells in the walls of the gate, in which a number of people sit during
the greater part of the day.

It was because of the publicity of the Hebrew gateway, that the Lord
commanded the ancient Israelite to write upon it the words of his holy
law. Texts of the sacred book were ordered to be transcribed upon the
posts of their houses, and upon their gates, that all Israel might
continually be reminded of the Great Jehovah, and of his high and holy
commands. The labourer, as he went forth to his fields and his vines,
looked up to the written words, and the merchant's busy thoughts of gain
were sometimes arrested and brought into a different course. Many a
pious Israelite regarded them with love and reverence, and perhaps, like
David, thanked God for them, and could exclaim, "Thy word is very pure;
therefore thy servant loveth it:" and often they suggested thoughts of
prayer, or led the mind of the pious Jew forward to the Great Messiah,
who should come one day to fulfil all those solemn types and shadows
which the law now set forth, and who should, under a more glorious
dispensation, himself magnify the law, and make it honourable.
# Proverbs 31 Verse 24


**SHE MAKETH FINE LINEN, AND SELLETH IT;\
 AND DELIVERETH GIRDLES UNTO THE MERCHANTS.**


The Hebrew word translated "fine linen" has been much studied by the
writers on Biblical literature, as our translators have thus rendered
several words from the original. Woollen garments seem to have formed
the chief articles of dress among the ancient Jews; but, both in Egypt
and Syria, garments were also worn of fine linen and cotton, as well as
of a substance called *byssus*. This latter material seems to have been
a fabric of fine muslin-one of those "webs woven of hair," which in
India are worn at the present day, and which the Hindoo ladies wrap
around them in numerous folds of drapery. It seems probable that persons
of wealth and distinction in Canaan, as well as the priests and Levites,
wore garments of fine linen, either white or dyed; made of the linen
manufactured either in Egypt, or of the somewhat inferior quality made
in the Jewish household, such as was wrought by the excellent woman in
the text.

The general culture of flax in Palestine, the statement that the women
spun it for the hangings of the tabernacle, and the still more immediate
fact that this woman, when she worked willingly with her hands, sought
flax as well as wool, leads us to infer that in this passage at least
the rendering of linen rather than silk or cotton is the true one.
Although, according to the Talmudists, the ancient Hebrew wore a woollen
garment next his skin by day, yet cleanliness and comfort rendered it
necessary that the nightly dress should be made of linen, and this
appears to have been the general practice. Many of the robes of purple,
scarlet, blue, and other colours, of which we read, appear to have been
of a linen fabric.

But this word is thought by some writers to imply a loose inner garment,
generally worn in the East-a kind of shirt. Kimchi thinks the word
signifies a night‐covering, and considers that it ought to be translated
"linen sheets." "The Arabic," says Dr. Clarke, "gives a remarkable
rendering of this verse: 'She maketh towels or table‐cloths, and sells
them to the inhabitants of Bozra-a city of Mesopotamia-and fine linen,
and sells them to the Canaanites.'" Kitto concurs with the Rabbi in
thinking that the word here used, describes either sheets, or else under
garments made of linen. It is the same as is rendered sheets in the book
of Judges, where Samson promised thirty sheets and thirty changes of
raiment, as a reward for guessing his riddle. It is not at all probable
that in this latter case sheets are intended, because when Samson slew
thirty Philistines near Ashkelon, it is hardly to be supposed that they
were carrying their bed‐clothes with them. Besides, they would, like all
other eastern beds, have had two sheets, and therefore thirty would have
provided twice the number required, while the shirts taken from the
bodies of the slain would have exactly supplied Samson with the means of
performing his promise.

As no pictures or monuments have descended from the people of Israel to
the modern Jew, we have no definite means of ascertaining their mode of
dress. Scripture allusions form our chief guide, but tradition, as well
as the costumes figured on the monuments of the other ancient nations of
the East, and the present mode of dress in Egypt and the Holy Land,
afford some assistance. It is still customary for the Bedouin to wear a
cotton or woollen shirt or frock, generally fastened round the waist
with a girdle. This is often, in summer, the only dress of the poor, and
is the usual indoor dress even of the wealthy class of society. In
winter, persons of humble condition wear over this garment the woollen
mantle or "hyke," a kind of dress very similar to the plaid of the
Scottish Highlander. The hyke may be described as a large woollen
blanket, serving as a covering both for day and for night; and was, most
likely, the garment referred to in that humane provision of the law,
where, if the Israelite took a pledge of his poorer brother, he was
enjoined: "In any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the
sun goeth down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and bless thee:
and it shall be righteousness unto thee before the Lord thy God" (Deu
24:13).

The Talmud enumerates eighteen several garments, as forming the dress of
the ancient Israelites; and it is evident from Scripture, that many
robes and garments were worn by the rich, though the frock and mantle
might serve for the poor.

That fine linen was worn only by persons of distinction in Canaan, is
very apparent, from the value attached to it, and the comparisons it
suggested. When the beloved apostle John wrote, in the isle of Patmos,
that solemn revelation of prophecy, so much of which yet remains
unfulfilled to the church and to the world, the fine linen, pure and
white, presented to his mind an image of the righteousness of the
redeemed church. "And to her," says he, "was granted that she should be
arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the
righteousness of saints,"-that spotless robe wrought by the Saviour, for
every child of God, redeemed from among men by the blood of the Lamb,
sanctified by his Spirit, and made meet for tuning the golden harp of
the celestial city-that robe, of which the Saviour says, "I counsel thee
to buy of me white raiment, that thou mayest be clothed;" lest, being
unclothed, the sinner should find, at the great day of God's judgment,
that he was "poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked, having nothing
in which to appear but his own righteousness," which the Scripture has
declared to be, in the sight of God, but as "filthy rags."

In a house in which the manufacture of various tissues seems to have
been carried on so diligently, as in that of the excellent woman, linen
enough would be wrought for traffic. Both this and the girdles were
probably sold, not only to the merchants of her own city, but also to
the Canaanites, or Phoenicians, who traded with them to Egypt and other
distant lands, which their ships visited.

The continual reference to the girdle in Scripture, establishes the
fact, that among the ancient Hebrews it was considered as necessary an
article of attire, as it is in the present day in oriental countries.
Its use in girding the loins for exertion has been already referred to,
but it served also for various other purposes. The ancient Jews are
supposed to have worn two girdles, the one around the body, under their
inner garment, the other around their outer dress. It was this latter
girdle which was tightened for exercise. The wealthy Jews, who evidently
paid much attention to dress, no doubt prided themselves upon the taste
and manufacture of this portion of it. In the present clay, the Arabs
wear, as a girdle, an embroidered shawl, or a figured muslin, and the
girdle is a piece of outward finery throughout the East. Sometimes it is
beautifully wrought with coloured wools or silks, shells, beads, etc.
Among the poorer classes, leathern girdles are still worn, and probably
differ little from that with which John the Baptist fastened his
camel's‐hair garments. Leathern girdles are also worn by the richer
Arab, when he prepares his dress for a journey.

The girdle most commonly worn by the ancient Hebrews, was probably made
of woollen fabric, skilfully wrought by woman's hand with embroidered
patterns. It folded several times round the body, and confined the
floating garment. One end of this girdle was doubled back, and sewn at
the edge, so as to form a purse, and was most likely referred to by our
Saviour, when, sending forth his apostles on their holy mission of love,
he said, "Provide neither gold nor silver, nor brass, in your purses."
The Romans and Greeks also formed their purses by the folding of the
girdle, and there carried their money. Paxton quotes the saying of C.
Gracchus, in Aulus Gellius: "Those girdles which I carried out full of
money, when I went from Rome, I have, at my return from the province,
brought home empty. Forbes mentions that the Mahrattas of the present
day generally carry in their leathern girdles, covered with velvet,
their most valuable papers and precious jewels.

It appears from the Scriptures, that the ancient Hebrews, like the
modern Turks, wore a poniard or sword in their girdle; for we read: "And
Joab's garment that he had put on was girded unto him, and upon it a
girdle with a sword fastened upon his loins in the sheath thereof; and
as he went forth it fell out." (2Sa 20:8). This practice must not be
understood as designed for a cruel and revengeful purpose, but
originated in the want of knives. The Turkish secretary, or writer of
modern days, substitutes for this weapon in his girdle, the ink‐horn and
the pen; and it seems probable that those among the Jews whose
employments were of a literary character, wore ink‐horns in their
girdles. Thus we read in Ezekiel, of one who was clothed with linen, and
had an ink‐horn by his side (Eze 9:2). The pens too are placed in the
girdle, and the ink‐horn is firmly closed with a clasped lid.

The manufacture of girdles for the merchants, would of course employ
many hands. When we consider, too, that girdles, as well as robes, are
in request for presents all over the East, this alone requires a great
supply. The Rev. W. Jowett has said, that the two words "give, give,"
might very properly be taken as a motto to the armorial bearings of
Syria. No one would think of appearing before a great man without a
present in his hand: as, says the proverb, "A man's gift maketh room for
him, and bringeth him before great men" (Pro 18:16); and the habit of
giving gifts, especially of various parts of the dress, extends itself
to the most ordinary occasions. The gift of a girdle from a warrior was
evidently a great mark of friendship. Among the Greeks and Romans, also,
it was thus considered. When Hector and Ajax ceased from the combat in
which they had encountered each other, Hector gave his girdle to Ajax as
a token of amity. In the book of Samuel we find Joab blaming the man who
saw Absalom hanging in the wood, in these words, "Why didst thou not
smite him there to the ground? and I would have given thee ten shekels
of silver, and a girdle" (2Sa 18:11). Jonathan, too, the "lovely and
pleasant" Jonathan, when about to certify the covenant made between
himself and his friend, gave, among other things, his girdle to David;
and even to the present day, the girdle is often loosed and given to one
who is beloved. "And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon
him, and gave it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to
his bow, and to his girdle" (1Sa 18:4).
# Proverbs 31 Verse 25

**STRENGTH AND HONOUR ARE HER CLOTHING;\
 AND SHE SHALL REJOICE IN TIME TO COME.**


The stability of the conduct of this Jewish woman and the good
reputation which it gained her, render this figure sufficiently
expressive. She was, indeed, clothed in strength and honour, and might
well rejoice in coming days. For old age she had prepared something more
than a store of mere worldly good. She had not only been provident of
present wealth, and wrought such works as time should not easily
injure-such as she should not blush to acknowledge as hers in future
time,-but she had laid up in the hearts of her husband and children, and
the poor and needy, a treasure of love, which time should not change.
Above all, if the days should come, when, in the figurative language of
Solomon, the grasshopper should be a burden, and desire should fail, and
the almond tree should blossom, her help and stay would be on God, her
hope and trust in heaven, and the joy of the Lord should be her
strength. He who had sustained her through the active period of life;
who had kept alive in her heart his love and fear, at a period when
temptations from outward circumstances and inward feelings were great,
would not fail her, in days when exertion would become toil, and when
the desire of rest had taken the place of pleasure in her heart; for he
had said, "Even to your old age I am he; and even to hoar hairs will I
carry you."

How beautiful and graceful is the repose of the aged servant of God! How
placid the mental rest and assurance of one who has served God from
youth upward! The Christian graces, mellowed by time, shine now with a
mild and settled lustre, and the meek waiting upon God diffuses over the
later hours of life its calm and steady light, like the soft tints which
the moon casts on the tranquil sea. Every one too must rejoice, who has
been enabled, by God's grace, to maintain through life a consistent
profession of holiness; and to have spent the days in useful employment,
must bring to old age its pleasant recollections. No self‐gratulation
would indeed fill the pious mind on a review of the past. "Not unto us,
O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name" be the praise (Psa 115:1), would
be the exclamation of one who opened her mouth with wisdom; but she
would trace with thankfulness, how God had led her all her life through
the wilderness; how he had placed her in a land where his ordinances
were known, and his name honoured; and had enabled her to conduct her
household in the fear of the Lord, and to provide them with every
temporal and spiritual good. For such blessings she would rejoice in the
time to come, in the season of grey hairs; for such pleasant
remembrances, she would lift up her heart to God and be thankful.

But the time to come may have reference to the day of death-to that
solemn hour of final parting with earth-to that glorious moment of
entering heaven; and at a period when the worldly woman might shrink
with fear, she might rejoice in the Lord. For David sang, and the
response to his harp has been echoed by millions of God's children in
the last hour: "Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff
they comfort me" (Psa 23:4). Leaning on this staff, how many pious men
and women of all ages have entered the valley, singing as they went!
Many years before this time Jacob had said on his dying bed, "I have
waited for thy salvation, O Lord;" and Job, full of a fervent faith, had
exclaimed, "I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at
the latter day upon the earth: and though after my skin worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God" (Job 19:25-26). We have not
recorded for us the last breathings of Moses, yet how calmly and
cheerfully did he resign his breath! and when the Lord bade him go up
alone to Mount Nebo, and to die there, after having given his last
glance to the promised land, what was his testimony of his heavenly
Father? "Yea," said the dying saint, "the Lord loved his people;" and
looking up to God, he added, "all his saints are in thy hand" (Deu
33:3), and thus he rejoiced in God, when heart and flesh were failing.
"Ah!" said a holy woman known to the writer, "in a few moments I shall
be in heaven; I have nothing to do now; I am only waiting: oh, how I
long to be released! Christ is with me; nature may fail, but he never
will."

The "time to come" may also have reference to eternity-to the unending
myriads of years to be spent in the presence of God-to the days of glory
to be passed in that heavenly city, to which the pious Jew, as well as
the Christian, was tending, where the inhabitant shall no more go out.
And who shall describe or imagine the joys of heaven? What earthly
tongue shall tell of the rejoicing in that time to come, when the Lord
shall say, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant, enter thou into
the joy of thy Lord?"
# Proverbs 31 Verse 26

**SHE OPENETH HER MOUTH WITH WISDOM;\
 AND IN HER TONGUE IS THE LAW OF KINDNESS.**


It is pleasing to turn from the contemplation of the active duties of
this Jewish matron, to the gentle graces which adorn her character. So
many proofs of practical judiciousness are exhibited in this
portraiture, that we are not surprised to find that she also opened her
mouth with wisdom. It is, however, a most difficult part of
self‐government to guard the tongue. The apostle James recognised this,
when he said, "If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man,
and able also to bridle the whole body." And yet how important a medium
of good or ill is conversation! The children in a household gather
instruction not only from direct teaching, but from the casual
expressions to which they listen. A word spoken in due season, how good
is it! and happy are they, who form part of the domestic circle of one
whose piety and experience of life enable her to give wise counsels, and
to utter sentiments of justice and truth!

The wisdom for which this woman is commended, related not alone to the
things of the present world. She was one who feared the Lord. She could
tell to her listening household of the wonders of nature, of the
deliverances wrought by God's providence to ancient Israel. How he
brought them through the Red Sea, and out of the land of bondage, and
gave them the promised country. She could point to the infallible laws
of nature, and show that the morning sun and the evening star never
disappointed him who watched for them in the heavens. She could point to
the lily of the field, which bloomed at its appointed season, and to the
swallow which knew the time of its coming, and infer from them, that he
who gave his written promise would as assuredly fulfil this also. She
could discern, in the types and figures of God's law, the shadows of a
more glorious future; and the promise of Messiah, the Hope of Israel,
who was to bring comfort and holiness to the church of God, was a living
fountain of joy in her bosom. Doubtless, too, she could tell of family
and individual mercies, for God never implanted his fear in any human
heart, but in that heart was awakened a chord of love and gratitude,
which excited it to praise. She could remind her children of God's
solemn commands, and, speaking of the saints of older times, could bid
them to be "not slothful, but followers of them who through faith and
patience inherited the promises." Hers was the wisdom described in
Scripture, as that which cometh from above, which is "first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy" (Jam 3:17).

But the wisdom of the Jewish woman related not alone to the things of
our better life, it took cognizance also of the affairs of this. While
she did not always speak of the things of religion, she spoke always as
a religious woman, as one who felt the responsibility of life and duty.

> "Methinks we see thee, as in olden times,\
>  Unmoved by pomp or circumstance-in truth,\
>  Inflexible, and with a Spartan zeal\
>  Repressing vice and making folly grave.\
>  Thou didst not deem it woman's part to waste\
>  Life in inglorious sloth-to sport awhile\
>  Amid the flowers, or on the summer wave,\
>  Then flee, like the ephemeron, away;\
>  Building no temple in her children's hearts,\
>  Save to the vanity and pride of life\
>  Which she had worshipped."

The wisdom with which this woman opened her mouth, was most likely that
derived from experience of life, from thought and observation, and a
knowledge of her own heart. It was something better than mere learning,
and did not consist in a simple acquaintance with facts. Facts, with
such a woman, would form the basis of intelligent thought; and while her
wisdom would not be opposed to cheerful converse and the play of fancy,
it would discountenance sin and folly, and all profane jestings or
irreligious allusions, and qualify her to give good counsels as a mother
in Israel.

> "Knowledge and wisdom, far from being one,\
>  Have ofttimes no connexion. Knowledge dwells\
>  In heads replete with thoughts of other men;\
>  Wisdom in minds attentive to their own.\
>  Knowledge, a rude unprofitable mass,\
>  The mere material with which wisdom builds,\
>  Till smoothed and squared, and fitted to its place,\
>  Does but encumber whom it seems to enrich.\
>  Knowledge is proud that he has learned so much-\
>  Wisdom is humble that he knows no more."

It is a beautiful and appropriate praise of woman, that on her tongue is
the law of kindness. When we look on this fallen world, and see what
misery has been brought into it by sin; that the storm, and the famine,
and poverty, and sickness, bring sufferings which none can avert; and
when we see, too, that there exist sorrows deeper still than these, and
hear the expressions wrung out from hearts full of anguish, how strange
does it seem, that any should add to the afflictions of life by a want
of kindness, or aggravate by cruel words the bitterness with which the
heart is already breaking! And if the sorrows of life demand sympathy
and help from every member of the human family-if it is by bearing one
another's burdens that we are to fulfil the law of Christ, surely there
is an especial claim on woman for deeds and words of kindness. On her
devolve all the tender offices of life. To her care is given the frail
and helpless infant, needing from the hour of its birth all that deep
and earnest solicitude, and patience, and self‐denial, which God has
provided for in the richness and fulness of maternal love. In her
charge, too, is placed the simple child, with its questionings of
wonder, and its innocent confidence; needing the exercise of love and
tenderness, to restrain the sinful propensities of its nature, and to
lead into the paths of peace. And where is woman's kindness more often
needed, or more often seen, than in the chamber of sickness? It is hers
to watch through days and nights by the couch of suffering; to tread so
softly as not to disturb the lightest sleep; to anticipate every want;
to bear patiently with the irritability of pain; and to minister relief
with a tact and unweariedness, to be found no where so securely as in
woman's love. It is often woman's lot, too, to point the dying man to
that atonement for sin, which the death of the Saviour has provided; and
frequently, in dwellings where the foot of the man of God may not have
found its way, she may be found bringing the joyful tidings of salvation
to the repentant sinner.

> "O woman! though thy fragile form\
>  Bows like the willow to the storm,\
>  Ill suited in unequal strife\
>  To brave the ruder scenes of life:\
>  Yet, if the power of grace Divine\
>  Find in thy lowly heart a shrine;\
>  Then, in thy very weakness strong,\
>  Thou winn'st thy noiseless course along;\
>  Weaving thine influence with the ties\
>  Of sweet domestic charities,\
>  And softening haughtier spirits down\
>  By happy contact with thine own."

God has provided for woman's duties, by endowing her with the faculties
which tend to their performance. He has given the quick sensibility; the
lively imagination, which helps her to guess, by a word or glance, at
the feelings of others; and in most cases a warm devotion to those whom
she loves: and it cannot be denied, that impulses of kindness are
generally found in the female sex. It remains for a holier motive than
mere human feeling, to make this kindness constant and enduring; and it
needs a sense of duty, derived from a consideration of love to God, to
enable woman to be kind always, and be kind to all, even her enemies,
and especially to let all her words be governed by the law of kindness.

It is often a painful subject of remark, that sometimes the very woman
whose kind acts may be depended on is guilty of a serious want of
kindness in her conversation; but it must be admitted that many, even of
the educated in our own land-nay, many even among Christian women, are
lamentably deficient in this respect. This we shall see, if we consider
to what the law of kindness in the tongue is opposed. It is opposed to
angry words. How many yield to angry passions, and utter, in unguarded
moments, words which can never be recalled, and which leave a painful
impression on others not to be effaced, while they thus lay up for
themselves a store of bitter remembrances! Many reproofs are given in
anger, which excite in the person reproved no feeling but that of ill
will; whereas, had they spoken wisely and gently, they might have
softened the heart. Anger is a temporary madness, discomposing the
spirit and rendering it unfit either for earthly duty or heavenly
communion. It is, as the proverb declares, "a snare to the soul." A
person cannot pray while under its influence. How can we ask for sins to
be forgiven, if we are either angry without a cause, or even on lawful
causes are carrying anger too far? or who can turn, in the midst of
proud and angry words, to the lowly prayer, the confession of sin, the
deep humility of heart, with which alone we can approach the footstool
of Jehovah? It is not before God's throne that we can indulge in wrath;
and as we may at any moment be called to die, so we ought at every
moment to be fit for prayer. And wrath and anger are especially sinful
and displeasing in a woman, as gentleness is her especial virtue. "A
man," says a female writer, "in a furious passion is terrible to his
enemies: but a woman in a passion is disgusting to her friends; she
loses the respect due to her sex, and she has not masculine strength and
courage to enforce any other species of respect."

There is indeed an anger which is not sinful, nor contrary to the law of
kindness which should ever govern a woman's tongue. There is a righteous
indignation against sin and oppression, which we find enjoined in
Scripture by the words, "Be ye angry, and sin not," and which the holy
apostles, and even our Saviour himself, so often expressed while on
earth. Had not public anger been shown against slavery, our country
might still have laboured under its heavy guilt, and our
fellow‐creatures under its mighty curse. Against this, as against other
national and individual sins, woman's voice was not wanting to express
displeasure, nor was woman's hand slow to aid the great philanthropists
who sought its extinction. So in private life, warm and indignant words
against wrong and guilt, so far from offending God, are often marked by
his approbation, as proofs of that deep feeling of right, and that moral
courage, for which the holy woman of the text was commended by the pen
of inspiration.

The apostle James, whose epistle contains more admonitions against the
sins of the tongue than can be found in any other portion of holy writ,
has said, "The tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongue
among our members, that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire
the course of nature, and it is set on fire of hell" (Jam 3:6). Oh!
beautiful on woman's lips is the law of kindness, turning away wrath by
a soft answer; bearing with the irritabilities or the infirmities of
others, who have had fewer advantages in early training; enforcing truth
with gentleness and persuasion, and uttering that love which is
described by St. Paul, as that which "beareth all things, believeth all
things, hopeth all things, and endureth all things" (1Cr 13:7).

But far more commonly, among women in general, is the law of kindness
violated by censoriousness, or by sarcastic remark, than by anger. This
sin of the tongue is peculiar to neither sex, but is one which prevails
to a great extent in female society. The peculiar faculties of women, as
well as their habits, make this an offence against which they ought to
be watchful. In them exist a quickness of perception and imagination,
and consequently a ready sense of the ludicrous; and these, combined
with a facility of speech, a power of detail, and often a great degree
of leisure, expose them to the temptation of indulging in that "evil
speaking," which God's word has commanded us to put far away from us.
The habit of censuring the absent has much in it which ought to be
offensive to every generous mind. "Thou shalt not speak evil of the
deaf," is one of the commands of the law of Moses, which appeals to
every right sentiment; yet the same principle might be carried further,
and lead us to avoid speaking ill of the absent.

Nor is censoriousness chargeable only on those who strive to exaggerate
the reports of evil which they may have heard, or who put on them the
worst possible construction. To a sin like this surely Christian women
cannot be addicted; but many, alas! are not exempt from the habit of
dwelling, in conversation, on the actual faults and follies of others.
Few seem to think it is a sin, yet it is decidedly opposed to the law of
kindness that should regulate the tongue. It is a practice, too, which
increases by indulgence.

It may begin by an expression of displeasure against vice, but soon
advances to a watchfulness for offences in others. If we are to make a
man an offender for a word; if we are to watch narrowly for his faults,
it is generally easy enough to find some cause of censure. In many
things we offend all; and few indeed are they who can be found always
exempt from the blame of censoriousness. But when we are speaking of the
faults of our neighbour, we are sinning against love. And how many are
the reputations which have been injured by the repetition of casual
remarks! Well might the Hebrew sage declare, that "life and death are in
the power of the tongue;" for unkind remarks, and unjust suspicions,
have sometimes subjected the sensitive to griefs more distressing than
even death itself.

> "Oh! never, never let us fling\
>  The barb of woe to wound another;\
>  Oh! never let us haste to bring\
>  The cup of sorrow to a brother."

And who are they who are foremost to detect the faults of others, and to
judge them severely? Certainly not those who have watched most
diligently over their own hearts. They who have striven and longed most
for conformity to the law of God, and to the example of the Saviour,
know best, how many graces need diligent cultivation, how many sins need
to be subdued. They know, too, that often when they have believed that
some sin had been conquered, it has, in an unguarded hour, again given
them sorrow, and again they have had to pray for help, and to strive
against it. And ever has it been seen, that the best and holiest are the
most pitiful; and that they who have the law of kindness on the tongue
are the very women who are most likely also to open the mouth with
wisdom, and to live in the consistent practice of every feminine duty.

And the sarcastic reply, too, how frequently does it wound! If others
sin, we are not to let that sin pass unnoticed. "Thou shalt in any wise
rebuke thy brother, and not suffer sin upon him." But in what way is
reproof to be administered? We are told to rebuke with all
long‐suffering and gentleness. Sin is a deep evil: it is not to be
spoken of lightly, nor to be the subject of a bitter jest. It is to
engage our earnest expostulation. The apostle spoke, even weeping, of
those who were enemies to the cross of Christ; and with a conviction of
our sinful nature, and our dependence on the grace of God for safety, we
are to reprove others. Sarcasm should never be on the lip of a Christian
woman, for she, indeed, should ever be found with the law of kindness on
her tongue. If bitterness is in the word of reproof, the reprover is not
sinless; and her rebuke does not originate from the love of God, and the
hatred of sin, but from the indulgence of a sinful nature. Pride must
not be met by pride: pride in others is never cured by being mortified
and insulted, but is rather increased into hatred and revenge.
Wherefore, putting away all wrath and malice, and evil speaking, "be
kindly affectioned one to another" (Rom 12:10).

The law of kindness is often broken, also, by haughty words spoken to
inferiors, when, forgetful that the dependant is one of God's large
family, he is addressed as a stranger and an alien. The haughty look and
the proud heart are an abomination unto the Lord. Pride ever proceeds,
too, from an ignorance of ourselves, as Wordsworth has said:-

> "He who feels contempt for any living thing\
>  Has faculties within his soul which he has never used;\
>  And thought with him is in its infancy."

Who has not marked the mild and blessed influence of her on whose tongue
is the law of kindness? It is to such a woman that the little child
comes for direction. It is to such that the sufferer tells his tale of
sorrow, in full certainty of that ready sympathy, which can do so much
to lessen it; and whether the tale be that of bodily pain, or of the
deeper woe of mental emotion; whether it be of the convinced spirit
struggling with a sense of sin, and with only a vague idea of the
possibility of pardon, or perhaps with no idea at all; or whether it be
some temporary cause of depression, some worldly loss, or some
unexpected unkindness, yet all may be soothed by the gentle accents of
compassion and tenderness. How many quarrels are averted by the
mediation and counsel of such a woman! how many beginnings of strife
stopped in their progress by a word of gentle remonstrance! and how many
little domestic troubles prevented or met by her kindly warning or
encouragement! And let no woman say that she cannot acquire a sweet
temper; that she cannot always have on her lips the law of kindness. She
may be naturally irritable, and, worse still, her natural irritability
may never have been checked by the restraining power of early education;
but there is a deeper and fuller restraining influence than even
that-namely, the principle of love to God; and the cultivation of this
love in the heart will lead to a prayer for holiness of heart and lip,
which never goes up to Heaven unanswered, and to a constant and earnest
striving with a besetting sin, which God's Holy Spirit will aid and
bless.
# Proverbs 31 Verse 27

**SHE LOOKETH WELL TO THE WAYS OF HER HOUSEHOLD,\
 AND EATETH NOT THE BREAD OF IDLENESS.**


When we consider the great influence which family training has on the
world at large, we cannot wonder that He who divided mankind into
families, should so commend the woman who looked well to the ways of
those who compose the circle which she superintends. The constant
recognition of family duties, the emphatic injunctions that women should
be keepers at home, and love their husbands and love their children, all
lead us to the remembrance that God is not only the God of each
individual, but that he is indeed the God of all families. It was the
praise given of the patriarch, by Jehovah, "I know Abraham, that he will
command his household after him." Moses reminded the ancient Hebrew,
that the statutes of God were not for himself only, but that "they were
for his son's son, all the days of his life;" and added to his command,
the assurance "that it may be well with thee, and with thy children
after thee." The Great Founder of human families knew that it could be
well only with the people in general, in proportion as household duty
and religion were taught and practised. From the house-the quiet
hearth-the peaceful vine‐arbour-were to go forth those who should form
the future nation. And still the senator and the philosopher, the
philanthropist and the missionary, go from the house of youth full of
the sentiments which they have learned there, and with their habits
formed on the model of home.

There is something so endearing in the ties which weave around the early
home, that every human heart feels their power. The gentle words of a
mother's love, the counsels of a father's wisdom, how do they return
with freshness and vividness upon the spirit, long after the lips which
uttered them have mingled with the dust; and are awakened with all their
power, by some little incident, some casual word-the sight of a
handwriting-the scent of a flower. The Rev. James Hamilton records the
narrative of one who unexpectedly joined with a family in the solemn
service of family prayer; one who had wandered from God and truth, yet
was recalled to religion and duty by this circumstance. And was it the
word of God, as uttered in that prayer, which subdued the proud spirit
of infidelity? No! he heard it not: his heart was filled with the
remembrances of home. He thought of the peaceful hearth on which his own
father once knelt, and commended to God his surrounding family. All the
guilt which he had incurred by his forgetfulness of the prayers and
lessons of home rushed upon his spirit, and from that hour he sought the
God of his fathers.

And who has never felt a deep emotion, at the thought of the home of his
youth? The child at school yearns for his home; the sailor on the deep
is full of thoughts of that one happy spot of earth; and when the angry
waves threaten his bark, his heart swells with the remembrance of home.
The prodigal who wilfully left that home is often led back to the paths
of virtue and religion, as some of its teachings are brought to his
mind. And the exile, and the weary wanderer-is not home to them so dear,
as that they cannot name it but with a trembling breath? and as the moon
smiles out on the scene of their exile, does not the recollection that
she smiles too on their home, bow down even the strong man, and bring
tears into the eyes of those who are little used to weep? And the
wanderer on this world's wilderness, who has found that earth has no
home for him, can any sweeter description be given to him, or one which
speaks more touchingly to his heart of a future world, than this, "There
remaineth therefore a rest to the people of God" (Hbr 4:9)-a home never
to change-a mansion that passeth not away?

When God gives to a mother's care a helpless child, what a solemn charge
does the mother receive! A being born for eternity, a creature destined
to everlasting happiness or misery, is committed to her, and its future
character and destiny in great measure dependent on her instruction and
example-its eternal condition often determined by the hours spent in the
home of its parents. And God has given great encouragement to the mother
who looks well to the ways of her household; for when he says, "Train up
a child in the way he should go," he adds the promise, "and when he is
old he will not depart from it" (Pro 22:6). This promise has often been
fulfilled in the holy and useful lives of those whose home has proved a
nursery for God. And though the child of a pious mother may stray in
youth from the ways of wisdom, yet often he returns to the path of truth
before he is old. And when we see the child of religious parents
wandering on in error and vice, and at last dying impenitent, shall we
conclude that the promise of God has failed? Alas! it is not every pious
mother who looks well to the ways of her household. The love of the
creature sometimes overpowers for a time the love of the Creator; and,
as in the case of the sons of Eli, the child is too often left to his
uncontrolled passions, and the mother, in helpless sorrow, looks on the
growth of vices which it was her duty to check, and drinks at last, with
bitter anguish, the cup which her own mismanagement and indulgence had
filled. She can value and keep God's word herself, but has not courage
to command her children, or to make them obey.

Nor is it only while the child forms one of his parents' household, that
there is a danger of failing in the duty of training him rightly. Many a
pious parent fulfils to the children under his roof the command given to
God's ancient people when Moses said: "These words, which I command thee
this day, shall be in thine heart: and thou shalt teach them diligently
unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine
house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and
when thou risest up" (Deu 6:7), But ambition, and the love of the world,
which seemed to have been stifled in the parent's heart for himself, are
sometimes awakened for his child. He may have seemed to learn the lesson
of being content with lowly things, but is tempted to seek great things
for his children. How often do we see this when a child is sent forth
from his own home! Some school, eminent for the learning and
accomplishments of its instructor, is preferred to that in which piety
forms the basis of education. Some eligible appointment presents itself.
Some means of increasing riches-some opportunity of forming connexions,
which may be of use in advancing his progress in the world, is offered,
and the child, trained in his parents' household to the duties of
religion and virtue, is sent into the world at an age when his character
is unformed, into scenes of great danger. And then come the bitter
consequences. The youth forgets the counsels of wisdom; he stifles the
voice of conscience; and the pleasures of the world allure him. Perhaps
he loses his morality, or even if his outward conduct remains the same,
yet spiritual religion gradually loses its influence; and the very
mother, who in early life looked diligently to his ways, has perhaps
joined her efforts in sending him thus unshielded into the world.

The looking well to the ways of her household, includes also the care of
domestic servants: and the maidens to whom the Jewish matron gave their
portion of food and work were doubtless guarded from evil by her
watchful prudence. Some mistresses appear to think that little
responsibility attaches to them with regard to servants, and that so
long as they provide them with home, and food, and wages, they perform
all the duty required. But the ways of every member of a household
should be looked to, by her whom Providence has placed at the head of a
family. The habits of life, the moral and religious character of each,
should be regarded by the mistress; and if an ignorant servant becomes a
member of a household, she should be instructed. It is plainly the duty
of all to lead a useful life, and it is in the immediate circle that we
are to commence our labours. The mistress of a family, while remembering
that her own advantages of training may have been superior to those
placed under her care, should strive that every servant who enters her
dwelling should be benefited during her residence there. Especially she
should employ the means of restraint with which she is endowed by her
authority, to prevent any irregularity of conduct, and the practice of
any wrong habits. She should see to the ways of her household, by taking
care that every one composing it should attend the means of religion.
Time and opportunity should be given for serving God. Her authority
should keep them from scenes of vice and dissipation, and from evil
company; and in forming her domestic plans, it is hers to regulate both
their comfort and their duty, on the broad principle of Christian
benevolence: "Whatsoever ye would that others should do unto you, do ye
also unto them."

It is desirable for the comfort of a family, and for its permanent
welfare, that the servants should be rightly directed and kindly
treated. Such conduct meets its immediate reward. Children are
necessarily influenced by them, and in that respect the character of
servants is most important to every household. In every family in which
they are kept, their performance of duty is requisite for order and
comfort, and this must be determined by their moral character. Their
willing service, and even their thoughtful tenderness, are required in
the hour of sickness; and their sympathy and help are sometimes wanted
in the day of sorrow. During that awful season of tragic suffering
comprised in the French revolution, many valuable lives were saved by
the attachment of confidential servants; and that period, remarkable for
the exhibition of some of the deepest crimes, and some of the sweetest
virtues of human nature, presents a record of devoted men and maidens,
who counted not even their own lives dear unto them, so that they might
rescue from danger some mistress whose former kindness had cheered them,
or some helpless child whom they once had carried in their arms. The
history of the church of God, too, could present details of holy and
useful servants, from the time when Phoebe was a servant at Cenchrea,
and Onesimus was dear to the apostle Paul, to the recent days when the
Dairyman's Daughter performed her humble duties with exalted faith and
fervent piety, till her spirit sought its heavenly home, and her frame
was laid in its lowly grave.

A woman so well taught in wisdom's ways as the matron of the text, would
know well that idleness leads certainly to vice and sorrow. Idleness and
fulness of bread were the vices mentioned as exciting God's wrath
against the sinful Sodom, and were doubtless the chief means of
fostering all its depravity. It is, indeed, the source of a thousand
ills, and so certain a cause of discomfort, that happier is he who earns
his bread by the sweat of his brow, than he who spends his life in
indolence. Cheerfulness is almost the necessary result of moderate
employment, just as *ennui* and languor are the consequences of a life
without pursuit. "Idleness," says old Burton, somewhat quaintly, "is the
badge of gentry; the bane of body and mind; the nurse of naughtiness;
the step‐mother of discipline; the chief author of all mischief; one of
the seven deadly sins; the cushion on which the devil chiefly reposes;
and a great cause, not only of melancholy, but of many other diseases:
for the mind is naturally active, and if it be not occupied about some
honest business, it rushes into mischief, or sinks into melancholy."

And what woman would wish so to pass her life that at death she should
not be missed? Of how many might it be said that the world and the home
could well spare them; but who can tell the worth of a life spent in
useful occupation? It is not till the seat is vacant on which the busy
matron sat; it is not till the implements of industry lie by unused,
till the animating voice is silent, and the busy hand is still, that we
fully perceive how much was done hourly, and quietly, and surely in the
well‐regulated home. From many such a hearth, when the mother has been
taken, the comfort of home is gone too; and ill‐managed children, once
so tenderly cared for, show their orphan condition to every passer by.
There is a solemn responsibility attaching to life-a responsibility only
to be met by active exertion; and a woe is denounced against the idle. A
woman who looked well to the ways of her household, would not only
herself avoid eating the bread of idleness, but she would see that each
one had a suitable engagement; and every one who is the mother of a
family not compelled to work, should strive to interest her children in
some one employment which they should cultivate with pleasure, and which
should call forth their latent energies. Much may be done for the young,
by consulting their tastes, and encouraging them in some pursuit; and
the skill to select this does not require in the mother so much talent,
as the exertion of that tact which is so common to women, and which,
like many other faculties, is rendered stronger by a woman's affection.

One of the first aims of education should be to promote activity of
mind; and the acquisition of a taste for simple and unexpensive
pleasures is, in itself, so valuable a source of enjoyment, that it is
to be regretted, that this is also not made a more usual part of
education. On this account, may be recommended the study of the various
departments of natural history and science. It may seem to matter little
indeed, that a woman should be a botanist, or an entomologist; though
all would allow that these pursuits might afford much pleasure: but the
activity of mind, and the power of application and observation, which
such a study will awaken, is of incalculable worth. Plutarch said that a
woman who studied geometry would not be fond of dancing; and we may add,
that a woman who feels interested in studies of this nature, will
neither be frivolous nor idle.

But it is only to the few that the choice of the pursuits of life is
left. The many are called to work in this anxious, toiling world, and
thousands are sighing for that leisure which others waste so carelessly.
But has active and regular employment no advantages? Does not the heart
fill with pleasure when the eye marks the fruit of exertion? and does
not the hour of occasional recreation bring with it far more of
enjoyment, and is it not fuller of life, than is the day of indolence to
the unemployed? Above all, is not the busy man or woman living the life
which God has ordained? His own word has said, "If any will not work,
neither shall he eat." The ancient Hebrews had all their occupations.
The rich and the poor were alike taught in the knowledge of some
business, by which they might labour with hand or head; nor did rank or
station exempt any from useful toil. And the result of this industry was
a thoughtful and provident people; a nation standing out from oriental
nations generally, as marked by an energy and force of character, much
of which has descended to the modern Jew, under all the varied
circumstances of place and time.

In the consideration of the Christian graces, one cannot help remarking
that they are all active. Piety is not to consist in quiet
contemplation, but in active duty. If we read in the Scripture of love,
then there is the labour of love; and every kind heart knows the truth
of the proverb, that love can make labour light. If we read of faith, it
is of an active faith-a work of faith-a faith which overcometh the
world. If of hope, then is it a hope powerful enough to expel sin, since
he who hath this hope purifieth himself, even as God is pure. Holy
principle must lead to holy practice; and the woman who, while
professing to serve God, neglects the duty of caring for her household,
dishonours her Christian profession, and brings disgrace upon God's
cause. Even the Great Creator of the universe himself is represented as
active. Our Saviour remarked, "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work."
Our blessed Lord lived a life of unwearied labour in the cause of man.
The angels, too, are represented as employed, not only in tuning their
harps of gold and singing the songs of the celestial city, but as
winging their way to this world on ministries of love; and who shall say
how much they who shall be heirs of salvation are indebted to their
guardian care?
# Proverbs 31 Verse 28

**HER CHILDREN ARISE UP, AND CALL HER BLESSED:\
 HER HUSBAND ALSO, AND HE PRAISETH HER.**

The expression of rising up to bless the parent may have some allusion
to the eastern practice of rising and bowing to the ground before the
head of the family, as this mode of reverence is very general. Its full
meaning, however, appears to be that in which it would be taken in our
land; that the children rise from infancy to childhood, and on to youth
and manhood, with hearts full of affection, and grateful recollections
of the worth of an excellent mother.

It has been said that home praise is the truest praise; and it is
certain we can be known by none so well as by those who surround the
family hearth. A far higher virtue and more consistent excellence
belongs to her of whom all her household can speak well, than to those
who can shine only in company, and who require but the charms of
politeness and the graces of conversation to gain approval. And how
pleasant is it to hear the blessings bestowed by the child on the name
of the good mother! Who shall tell the hours of anxiety, the words of
care and tenderness, which such a mother has bestowed on his infancy;
the sleepless nights, and careful days, and all the maternal
solicitudes, which shielded from harm his childhood and early youth; and
which, as he grew older, changed their mode of expression, but never
lost sight of their object? Truly did Gray say, "We can never have but
one mother." No love, not even the tenderest, can equal hers; for she
will love on, though sickness should wither the flower and turn all its
beauty into decay; and fix her firmest and deepest affection on that one
of her children who has the least of outward grace and loveliness. Her
love, unlike all others, can withstand neglect, and ingratitude, and
forgetfulness. The prodigal son may stray from his home, and the world
may frown on him-and frown justly; and all the love of neighbours, or of
friends, or even of brother or sister, may have been worn out by his
folly and wickedness; yet is there a stream of love in the mother's
heart, ever fresh and ever living; he is still her own loved son; and
one word of penitence, one look of sorrow, will win forgiveness for a
life of unkindness. The love of a mother is like the bounty of God, who
"causeth his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain
on the just and on the unjust."

It is indeed a sure proof of their excellent education, when all the
children of a family can arise and call their mother blessed. And when
all are gathered in the circle of love, such a home presents the
loveliest scene on earth.

> "Domestic Happiness, thou only bliss\
>  Of Paradise that has survived the fall!\
>  Though few now taste thee unimpaired and pure;\
>  Or tasting, long enjoy thee; too infirm\
>  Or too incautious to preserve thy sweets\
>  Unmixed with drops of bitter, which neglect\
>  Or temper sheds into thy crystal cup.\
>  Thou art the nurse of Virtue-in thine arms\
>  She smiles, appearing, as in truth she is,\
>  Heaven‐born, and destined to the skies again."

When the law was given from Mount Sinai to ancient Israel, we find
included in it not only the reverence of the father, but "Thou shalt
honour thy father and thy mother," was its direct injunction. It would
be from the lip of his mother that the Jewish child would learn his most
sacred lessons. It must be remembered that the young Israelite had no
school but his home. He was not sent away from the paternal roof to
gather learning; but under its happy shadow he learned, from his
parents' lips, his knowledge of business, of life and duty, and became
early familiar with the law of God. He had not, perhaps, even his
smaller Bible to refer to, but this law was taught in the house when the
family met together; it was written up upon the gates of the city, and
read aloud by the priests and Levites to assembled multitudes. It does
not seem that, previous to the Babylonish captivity, the ancient
Israelites had schools, save those for the "sons of the prophets"-the
pious youths who were destined to be teachers in Israel-but many a
mother's tongue could tell of Israel's Hope, the glorious Messiah, the
Prince of the people, for whom every devout Israelite was hoping and
looking; and for whose advent the Hebrew matron was so anxious, that she
grieved if she was childless, because she hoped that from her house
might spring forth the "Prophet like unto Moses." Guided by his mother's
hand, the Jewish child went to the temple which God had chosen. From her
lip he learned the meaning of those yearly festivals, when every male
among the Jews appeared in Jerusalem, the holy city; and when, in after
times, they sang, as they went up, that beautiful psalm-"I was glad when
they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord. Our feet shall
stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem. Jerusalem is builded as a city that
is compact together: whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord,
unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord"
(Psa 122:1-4). And thus the pious Hebrew mother would weave with her
child's earliest impressions, a store of associations to bless his after
years. Oh that every mother in our own land would make her home a
nursery for God; and teach such Christian principle, and enjoin such
Christian practice, as would fully insure her children's love; then of
every British mother might it be said, "Her children arise up, and call
her blessed."

The husband of the excellent woman is represented as adding his praise
to that of the younger members of the family. He could indeed point to
her example for their imitation. He could praise her, not alone for the
comfort which her useful energy cast throughout his home, but for the
sweetness which her gentleness and goodness brought into it, and which
rendered it so attractive. He could tell of enjoyment provided by her
industry; of anxieties prevented by her caution; of sorrows lightened by
her sympathy; and could perhaps look around on children walking in the
fear of the Lord, who learned that fear from the teaching of their
mother.

> "Oh, say to mothers what a holy charge\
>  Is theirs!-with what a kingly power their love\
>  Might rule the fountain of the new‐born mind!\
>  Warn them to wake at early dawn, and sow\
>  Good seed before the world hath sown her tares;\
>  Nor in their toil decline-that angel bands\
>  May put their sickle in, and reap for God,\
>  And gather to his garner."

# Proverbs 31 Verse 29


**MANY DAUGHTERS HAVE DONE VIRTUOUSLY,\
 BUT THOU EXCELLEST THEM ALL.**

It does not seem probable that this high commendation is intended to be
taken by the inspired writer as the praise given by God to the Jewish
matron. Commentators generally refer, it to the warm expression of
affection and esteem uttered either by her husband or children, on a
review of her consistent and valuable life. Nor was this expression of
an overflowing affection without justice or truth for one who acted so
well would far exceed in virtue the generality of wives and mothers, and
would probably be superior in worth to any woman known by those who
praised her. The Septuagint, Syriac; and other versions render this
passage, "Many daughters have gathered riches;" and as industry seems to
have been a ruling feature in the character of Hebrew women generally,
at this early period, this rendering would not be unsuitable. In such
case, the praise would extend not only to the number of garments which
she had wrought for merchandise, but to her skill in acquiring property,
and her care in preventing an unnecessary expenditure of wealth.

But although so finished a degree of excellence as that recorded in this
beautiful poem must, at any period of this world's history, have been a
rare attainment, yet a great degree of loveliness and virtue marked many
of the women of early days. To all the mental vigour, and industry, and
noble sentiments which belong to the matron of ancient Rome, the Jewish
female seems to have added a warm, enthusiastic, and gentle tenderness,
which renders her lovelier than the sterner Roman lady; and which, while
it commands our respect, wins a deeper and warmer love. Nor was the
Hebrew woman wanting in that clear intellect, or versatility of talent,
which fitted her for rivalling the Grecian dame in the lighter and more
graceful accomplishments of life. The commands of Moses, the writings of
the prophets-nay, the very history of the creation of the world, on
which the eye of the ancient Israelite pondered, all taught that woman
was not intended for the slave of man. Recognising the woman as an
immortal being, providing for her protection and comfort, giving to her,
as to her husband, the assurances of God's favour and the hopes of a
future life, presenting her to the Hebrew as the mother of the coming
Messiah, the Jewish woman was raised above that degradation to which the
oriental female was subjected; and still, even in Asia, enjoys a freedom
and an importance unknown among other Asiatics. "The singular beauty of
the Hebrew women," says an interesting writer, "and the natural warmth
of their affections, having conspired to throw gems of domestic
loveliness over the pages of the Bible. In no history can there be found
a greater number of charming female portraits. From Hagar, down to Mary
and Martha, the Bible presents pictures of womanly beauty that are
unsurpassed and rarely paralleled. But we should very imperfectly
represent, in these general remarks, the formative influence of the
female character as seen in the Bible, did we not refer these amiable
traits of character to the original conceptions of which we have spoken,
and to the pure and lofty religious ideas which the Biblical books in
general present. If woman, then, appears as the companion and friend of
man, if she rises to that noble position which is held by the mother of
a family, she owes her elevation in the main to the religion of Moses
and to that of Jesus. The first system, as a preparatory one, did not,
and could not, complete the emancipation of woman." Let British females
remember what Christianity has done for them, and that their
responsibility is consequently greatly increased.

# Proverbs 31 Verse 30

**FAVOUR IS DECEITFUL, AND BEAUTY IS VAIN:\
 BUT A WOMAN THAT FEARETH THE LORD, SHE SHALL BE PRAISED.**


That worldly favour is vain indeed, we scarcely need the Scriptures to
tell us: experience of the world attests it; and the philosopher, and,
still more frequently, the poet, have again and again lamented the
worthlessness of the favour of this world. For a little while, the man
who rises in general favour is loved and honoured, his presence
welcomed, his opinion valued; but soon some new favourite takes his
place, and general adulation is directed to the rising sun. How many
have sickened, as they told how in hours of prosperity the smile of the
rich and the praise of the young and gay were given for a season; and
then, as some new mood came over the public mind, they were left to die
in poverty: while they who once sought their society, looked at them now
with cold indifference, and passed by them as strangers.

But the instability of worldly favour is not confined to public praise;
for, in the more private circles of fashionable life it is equally
deceitful. Favour is given to a woman because she is rich, or beautiful,
or elegant. She is praised and admired, and learns to take such
admiration as her right; and she finds it a true proverb, that "Men will
praise thee when thou doest well to thyself" (Psa 49:18). But poverty
comes suddenly, even as an armed man; sickness overtakes her, and all
her beauty fades like that of the flower of the field; and the graces,
which gave life and spirit to the gay assembly, are gone for ever. Then
she can add hers to the sad testimony of the poet:

> "The friends who in our sunshine live,\
>  When winter comes are flown;\
>  And she who hath but tears to give,\
>  Must weep those tears alone."

How frequently does the young and trusting heart swell with emotion on
the discovery of the deceitful nature of worldly favour! "The greetings
where no kindness is," are taken by the truthful as truth itself; and
when they change to coldness or contempt, the ardent spirit shrinks
beneath them, as the lily withers when the sunshine of heaven changes to
the chill north wind. And the young, having no hope of God's favour, or
of happiness in the world to come, exchange for a misanthropic and
ungentle spirit the trusting affection of an ingenuous mind, and become
like the cold and worldly beings whose deceitful favour once misled
them.

Perhaps there is scarcely a woman who has not listened to the voice of
flattery; and though the coarse praise of a flattering tongue would
disgust the pious, and displease too the cultivated and refined, yet
most have been sometimes beguiled by its more delicate and skilful
application. There is a self‐love in every human heart to which such
praise can appeal; and even the woman who knows the commendation to be
undeserved, will sometimes be pleased, as she believes that such at
least is the opinion of those who utter it. But time comes, and truth
comes with him, and with rude hand tears away the veil from falsehood,
and the deceived spirit learns at length the lesson that favour is
deceitful.

And is Christian intercourse altogether free from this deceitfulness?
Are there not prevalent, in Christian society, words and practices which
express far more than the heart can respond to? To the courtesies of
life no Christian should be indifferent. If the worldly woman learns,
from the politeness of the world, to prefer the comfort of others to her
own-if she must make sacrifices of feeling, that in society she may
appear kind and polite, how much more should Christian women practise a
gentle courtesy of manner, from the consideration that even Christ
pleased not himself! "Be ye kind, be ye courteous" (Eph 4:32) is the
injunction of a holy apostle; and all rudeness and incivility should be
shunned by every woman professing to have been taught of God.

On the other hand, is not the favour of that woman deceitful, who
stretches out the hand of kindness to her acquaintance, who welcomes her
to her house, and listens with apparent sympathy to the expression of
her feelings; and who will, on her absence, recount her faults or
ridicule her follies? Oh that all Christian Women were wholly free from
this portion of worldly false‐heartedness, this conformity to worldly
favour; and were ever sincere and candid in their expressions of
friendship! On them, at least, let the trusting heart lean, in full
assurance that the love which is uttered is the love which is felt.

But while we must admit that, even in Christian intercourse, much
imperfection exists, and the spirit of the world sometimes darkens the
brighter lustre of the Christian character, yet it has ever been the lot
of the sorrowful and desolate to find compassion and sincerity no where
so fully developed as in the circle of those who are the real followers
of Christ. The woman who sincerely fears the Lord, who lives nearest to
him, will be, too, the truest and best of earthly friends; and when
David said, "I am a companion of all them that fear thee" (Psa 119:63),
he could number among those servants of God the faithful friends of his
hours of adversity; and he could think of the pleasant Jonathan, and the
liberal Barzillai, and the faithful Nathan-men who never forsook him
when sorrow came, whose favour was never deceitful; but who loved him
best when most he needed their friendship, because their love was
strengthened by their fear and love of God.

And are not the favour and love of God unchanging? He has said, "Call
upon me in the day of trouble;" he has bid us, when earthly favour has
proved deceitful, to bring the worn and weary spirit to him for refuge.
And no one ever sought him in vain, or had reason to regret that he had
cast all his care on the loving‐kindness of an unchanging God.

We have not need to look far to see the passing nature-the vanity of
personal beauty;

> "For not a year but pilfers as it goes\
>  Some youthful grace that age would gladly keep:"

and time brings assuredly his wrinkles to furrow the fairest
countenance. Sudden or prolonged sickness changes the rose on the cheek
to paleness, and dims the eye whose brightness told a tale of health and
gladness; for when God with rebukes doth chasten for iniquity, he maketh
beauty to pass away like a moth; so that all, even in their best states,
are altogether vanity. But the frailty of beauty is most apparent when
we look on death, on that change which all must encounter. "It is," says
Jeremy Taylor, "a mighty change that is made by the death of every
person, and it is visible to us who are alive. Reckon but from the
sprightfulness of youth, and the fair cheeks and the full eyes of
childhood; from the vigorousness and strong flexure of the joints of
five‐and‐twenty; to the hollowness and dead paleness, to the
loathsomeness and horror of a three days' burial; and he shall perceive
the distance to be very great and very strange."

> "Oh, what is beauty's power?\
>  It perishes and dies.\
>  Shall the cold earth its silence break,\
>  To tell how soft and smooth a cheek\
>  Beneath its surface lies?\
>  Mute, mute is all\
>  O'er beauty's fall;\
>  Her praise resounds no more when mantled in her pall."

"But a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised." Such a woman
would have praise of God. The ornament of a meek and quiet spirit is of
great price, and to the true believer in Christ God will say at the
great day, "Well done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord" (Mat 25:21). And oh! what praise can equal this? Men
may praise those whom God disapproves. They may hold that to be good
which God abhors; and even when they have the right standard of
holiness, yet they may so little know the hearts of others as to mistake
in their estimate of good and evil. On whom is the praise of men
bestowed? On those who conquer kingdoms, who perform great exploits in
discovery and science, who make high attainments in knowledge, or who
clothe in lofty verse thoughts of beauty and genius. And who will deny
his meed of praise to the philosopher or the poet? We owe them so much,
that we could not pluck a leaf from the laurel or the bay without
ingratitude. Yet, in all their thoughts of sublimity or tenderness,
there may be no fear of God; he may not be pleased. "To that man will I
look," saith Jehovah, "who is of an humble and contrite heart, and who
trembleth at my word." The humble and lowly Christian, performing the
simplest and commonest duties of domestic life in his fear; seeking his
counsel, and earnestly striving to keep his commands; praying for the
guidance of the Holy Spirit, and confidently trusting for the pardon of
her sin in Him who died on the cross to redeem her-this is the woman on
whom shall be bestowed that best, that only praise which is truly
valuable; for of her the Lord himself shall say, She "hath chosen that
good part, which shall not be taken away from her" (Luk 10:42).

# Proverbs 31 Verse 31


**GIVE HER OF THE FRUIT OF HER HANDS;\
 AND LET HER OWN WORKS PRAISE HER IN THE GATES.**


This passage is thought by some writers to be the continuation of the
praise bestowed on this excellent matron by her husband; others regard
it as a prayer offered up on her behalf. We have spoken of the gate as
the place of assembly and of commerce, where the fruits of her industry
would be known and appreciated, and where men would speak of her
virtues; where she would be mentioned as a great example of female
excellence, and her deeds of mercy and her unblamable life would
characterize her as a mother in Israel, and a devout and humble servant
of the great Jehovah.

Although a life of consistent virtue generally brings its own reward in
the esteem of those whose good opinion is truly valuable, and though the
hand of the diligent usually, in some degree, maketh rich, yet it is not
always in this world that the good receive of the fruit of their hands.
But there is a world on which the holy women of old have long since
entered-a world to which we are all hastening, when every one shall
receive according to the deeds done in the body, whether they be good,
or whether they be evil. We cannot be saved by an exemplary and virtuous
life; for never yet was there a human being who lived, and sinned not;
and the holiest action ever performed by sinful man had yet mingled with
it so much infirmity of motive, that it needed the atoning blood of
Christ to render it acceptable in the eyes of an infinitely holy God.
But Christian principle, though it will not enable us, while in this
world, to offer a perfect obedience, will certainly be accompanied by
the practice of holiness, an earnest endeavour after godliness, and a
hatred and avoidance of sin. For the Scripture has said, "As the body
without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also" (Jam
2:26). While we cannot answer God for one of a thousand of our
transgressions, yet he will reward the humblest deed of good which
proceeds from love to Christ. And when the beloved apostle spoke of the
blessedness of those who die in the Lord, he adds, "they rest from their
labours, and their works do follow them" (Rev 14:13).

The pious deeds which they had wrought on earth were not forgotten in
heaven; but they followed as evidences of love to Christ, as the result
of holy principles, and are thus accepted and approved by a gracious
God. Blessed indeed are they who steadily endure, amid all temptation;
for when they are tried, they shall receive the crown of life, which the
Lord hath promised to them that love him: and thus the fruits of their
hands and hearts shall be given to them through all eternity.
