PREFACE.
==================

I found it necessary in the preparation of this Course of Lectures
to travel over a field of vast extent, and the subject has on this
account taken shape in my hands rather as a general survey of Theology
from the view-point of the doctrine of the Holy Spirit, than as an
exhaustive exposition of any single topic. To this course I was shut up
by the fact that attention could not be limited to only one or two
departments of the subject, and because a selection could not
satisfactorily be attempted. I have endeavored, therefore, to take a
survey of the doctrine of the Holy Spirit from the various points of
view commended to our attention by the testimony of Scripture on the one
hand, and by the results of theological discussion, as well as by the
ecclesiastical history of the doctrine, on the other. This has given a
threefold division to the work, and a threefold distribution of its
subject-matter.

To bring out these three aspects of the topic, it seemed necessary, IN A
FIRST DIVISION, to survey the Biblical testi mony in the Old and New
Testament, or to furnish such a sketch as would show that the doctrine
of the Holy Spirit was sufficiently exhibited and apprehended from the
first dawn of Revelation, though it was fully displayed only on the day
of Pentecost. Then follows, IN A SECOND DIVISION, a brief outline or
sketch of the positive truth accepted by the

Church, or the form in which the Church dogmatically holds the doctrine.
This is contained in the six Lectures which required to be formally
prepared. As this was still felt to be incomplete without a Historical
survey of the discussions connected with the doctrine of the Holy
Spirit, I have subjoined, ix A THIRD DIVISION, a condensed history of
the doctrine from the Apostolic age to the present time.

May the Holy Spirit, whose personality and work this treatise is
intended to exhibit, condescend to accept and bless it to the glory of a
Three-One God.

GEORGE SMEATON. lut October 1882.


# Biblical Testimony

THE topic on which we enter is by no means superfluous at this time.
Except where Puritan influences are still at work, we may safely affirm
that the doctrine of the Spirit is almost entirely ignored. The
representatives of modern theology, it is well known, have almost wholly
abandoned it. Many of them deny the Spirit's personality in the most
open and undisguised manner. Some affirm that a dogma on this topic is
not essential either to religion or theology, and that we may altogether
dispense with it. On the contrary, wherever Christianity has become a
living power, the doctrine of the Holy Spirit has uniformly been
regarded, equally with the atonement and justification by faith, as the
article of a standing or falling Church. The distinctive feature of
Christianity, as it addresses itself to man's experience, is the work of
the Spirit, which not only elevates it far above all philosophical
speculation, but also above every other form of religion.

In this day, moreover, it is impossible to divest the mind of the
impression that, among those who take religion in earnest, a disposition
exists, in no small measure, to pass over the supernatural agency of the
Holy Spirit, and to speak and write upon religious truth as if the
gracious intervention of the Son of God came more impressively home to
men's business and bosom when disencumbered of any reference to another Person as the great applier of redemption. In many cases that
tendency may rather be called a sentiment than a formal dogma; with
others it is a system. But in either case it betrays the most defective
views of the relations of the Trinity. By maintaining silence on this
doctrine, one of the grand provisions of the gospel for meeting the
wants of mankind is omitted.

But, it may be asked, not without reason, can any man in the nineteenth
century from the entrance of Christianity bo in doubt as to the
Personality, Deity, and work of the Holy Ghost ? Does not the Church
declare her belief in it as an elementary and fundamental truth in every
administration of the ordinance of baptism ? Is it not inserted in all
the Church creeds ? Have not theologians in former ages dis cussed and
vindicated it down from Patristic times and Reformation times so
copiously, that many pages might be filled with a mere enumeration of
the writers' names, and with the titles of their works ? The answer is :
Notwithstanding all this, unsettled opinion and doubt prevail upon this
point, to a surprising degree, abroad and at home, even among those who
profess to accept as authoritative the words of prophets and apostles,
and the sayings of our Lord. One explains them in one way, and another
explains them in a different way, in order to exclude this doctrine.

No one, it is true, has attempted, in reference to the doctrine of the
Spirit,—as has often been attempted in reference to the atonement,—to
show that the Lord's own teaching differed, in essential points, from
that of His apostles. The harmony is so unquestionable and so obvious,
that It gives to all a sufficient ground of confidence. Moreover, less
is said than formerly of accommodation; for reverent minds are ready to
admit that deception, however subtle and refined, is still deception,
and an element which is not to be endured in a divine revelation.

Theological opinion has taken a forward step in this respect, though not
much is really gained, while the language of Scripture—which a natural
method of interpretation would make conclusive as to the personality and
work of the Spirit—is explained away as figurative language, or as mere
personification, by many modern divines.

To set forth the doctrine of the Spirit EXEGETICALLY, according to the
programme which I have sketched, is not an unnecessary task in the
present state of theology; and, in carrying out this undertaking, my
object is truth, and truth alone, without the bondage of any artificial
system, past or present. So far as the outline of Scripture testimony is
concerned, I shall largely content myself with the results of
investigation, and often hold the statement of the process in abeyance.
And where the word is silent, I shall accept its silence as well as its
declarations without hesitation or reserve.

As to the Jewish Church, it was formed by a special education to receive
Christianity when it should come. It was the issue of a long
development, that they might comprehend the import of Christ's
instruction.

As we come in contact, in the course of this discussion, with the
doctrine of the Trinity at every point, it may be fitting to refer to
that great theme at the outset, so far at least as concerns the relation
which essentially belongs to the Holy Spirit. This will pave the way for
the consideration of the other doctrines which we have to discuss.
Though every attempt to comprehend or to unfold the mystery of the
Trinity has failed, and must fail, from the ineffable nature of the
subject, we may affirm that in the five following pro positions the
faith of the Church is satisfactorily exhibited, viz. :—

​1. That there is one God or divine essence.

​2. That the same numerical divine essence is common to three truly divine Persons, who are designated Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost.

​3. That between these three divine Persons there obtains a natural
order of subsistence and operation ; that the first Person hath life in
Himself (John v. 26); and that the second and third Persons subsist and
act from the first.
​4. That this order of the divine Persons belongs to the divine essence prior to, and irrespective of, the covenant of grace.

​5. That this natural order of subsistence and action is the ground and reason of the several names, Father, Son, and Spirit; the Son
being begotten of the Father, and the Spirit by spiration proceeding
from both.

And as to the divine WORKS, the Father is the source FROM WHICH every
operation emanates (ef ov), the Son is the medium THROUGH WHICH (£i ov)
it is performed, and the Holy Ghost is the EXECUTIVE BY WHICH (eV c5) it
is carried into effect.

The Christian Church, from the beginning, believed in the doctrine of
the Trinity with unhesitating faith. It was not a conclusion formed
gradually in the consciousness of the Christian community, partly by
reflection, partly by Biblical inquiry. The Church found in the
baptismal formula an emphatic allusion to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
and simply accepted it as her doctrine of the Trinity. It was brought
within the scope of every Christian mind, learned and unlearned, as the
fundamental and primary truth, of which no Christian disciple could
plead ignorance. The substance of the doctrine is, that God is one, and
that the Persons are distinct; and after all the investigations that
have confounded and fatigued the acutest understanding, we only return
to the same simple formula of baptism, which is level to the capacity of
the humblest.

The doctrine of the Trinity is not so much a point among many as the
very essence and compendium of Christianity itself. It not only presents
a lofty and sublime subject of contemplation to the intellect, but
furnishes repose and peace to the heart and conscience. *To explain this
mystery is not our province.* All true theologians, who have trained and
disciplined their minds in the right school, whether in expounding
positive truth or in combating erroneous views, have uniformly accepted
it as their highest function simply TO CONSERVE THE MYSTERY and to leave
it where they found it, in its inscrutable sublimity, or, as the poet
expresses it, " dark though excessive bright." Leibnitz happily said, If
we could bring it within the terms of any humanly constructed
definition, it would be a mystery no longer. The zeal and erudition of
the Fathers, accordingly, were mainly employed to retain and preserve
the mystery.

And when we look at the doctrine from the practical point of view, a
belief of this great truth is absolutely essential to the Christian man
and to the Christian Church. Without it, Christianity would at once
collapse. As this doctrine is believed on the one hand, or challenged on
the other, Christian life is found to be affected at its roots and over
all its extent. Every doctrine is run up to it; every privilege and duty
hang on it. It cannot escape observa tion that scarcely a heresy ever
appeared which did not, when carried out to its logical results, come
into collision with the doctrine of the Trinity at some point. Through
the whole history of opinion, the ever-recurring fact presented to us is
that, however a man may begin his career of error, the general issue is
that the doctrine of the Trinity, proving an unexpected check or
insurmountable obstacle in the carrying out of his opinions, has to be
modified or pushed aside; and he comes to be against the Trinity because
he has found that it was against him.

The attacks on the Trinity, menacing though they might be at the time,
have commonly been the occasion of real benefit to the Church. The
Church might have been less on the alert than was found to be
imperatively necessary when asked, for instance, by the Sabellian to
allow within her pale a mere modal distinction in the Trinity, or asked
by the Arian to give a certain amount of liberty to such as questioned
or denied the supreme Deity of the second or third person of the
Trinity. By varied discipline and experience, she has been schooled to
apprehend the doctrine of the tri-personal God, or of the threefold
personality in unity, as the most fundamental, vital, and practical of
doctrines; that it forms the ultimate ground of every truth; that it is
absolutely intertwined with the essential provisions of the gospel; and
that the plan of salvation cannot be left standing entire, if this great
doctrine, the keystone of the arch, is either loosened or displaced.

The Church, accordingly, has always posted herself here us in the
Thermopylae, where her last stand is to be made. She knew that, without
this doctrine, the Creed would have no coherence, nor her members solid
peace. The enlightened Christian neither expects nor wishes to find that
which will not baiile his comprehension by its vastness, nor dazzle him
by its splendor. Nay, the appeal to the ADORING WONDER of the finite
mind becomes more powerful when its limited capacity fails to comprehend
the theme in all its magnitude. The Christian Church, feeling that she
has to believe what God has condescended to declare, and alive to the
fact that there is no loyalty greater than the loyalty of the intellect,
calls for the submission of the finite reason. Hence every one feels the
force of these beautiful words of Gregory Xazianzen in reference to the
Trinity. In his sermon on Baptism he says: ov (f\>8dvo) TO eu vofjcrai
KCU rot? rpiai 1 ov \<f\>6dva) ra rpia SteXetf, KCU et? TO ev " I cannot
think of the ONE but I am imme diately surrounded with the splendour of
the THREE ; nor can I clearly discover the three, but I am suddenly
carried back to the One."

The objection to the Trinity on the ground of the un fathomable mystery,
has been repeated in every successive age. And it may not be out of
place to say that if there had been no mystery, an opposite objection
might not improbably have emanated from the very same parties. Had there
been no inscrutable doctrines beyond the sounding line of man's reason,
no profound mysteries in the revealed account of God's Being, purposes,
and works,—if such a thing were conceivable in a revelation communicated
from God to man,—the objectors might have decried and depreciated it
from a wholly different point of view as a stale, flat, and unprofitable
message, which had nothing in it worthy of the claims which it made on
men's minds, because it had nothing beyond the discovery of the human
understanding. When we reach the manhood of our being, we may understand
what we cannot now fathom. Addison and Swift both conjectured, not
unwarrantably, in connection with these very mysteries, that new
faculties might be given in the life to come to apprehend what is now
incomprehen sible and unknown.

I shall endeavour to bring out the testimony of Scripture to the
doctrine of the Holy Spirit as contained in the Old and New Testaments.
As my object in this division is to set forth the place which the
doctrine of the Spirit occupies in contrast with the modern
Sabellianism, I shall rather state the cumulative import than launch out
into a full or exhaustive exegesis of all the passages; and in
fulfilling this task it will be my aim, except where some elucidation is
necessary, to mix with it as little of my own as possible, lest foreign
elements should invalidate the evidence which is so conclusively
furnished by the harmonious testimony of the Scripture itself from first
to last. I shall try to evolve what the Scriptures say; and for that end
transplant myself into the circumstances in which the writers of the
different ages were placed. To penetrate, as far as possible, into the
teaching of inspired prophets before the coming of Christ, and of
inspired apostles subsequent to His resurrection, it will be necessary
to bring out, in a condensed outline, their scope and harmony.

That the Scripture testimony about to be adduced in refer ence to the
Holy Spirit may also be readily applied to the refutation of modern
errors, it may not be out of place to mention the Sabellian postulate,
and the deduction from it to which Schleiermacher has given expression
in this century. According to the view stated by Schleiermacher in his
ingenious way, all that is intimated by the names Sox OF GOD and SPIRIT
OF GOD did not exist before the work of redemp tion, and before the
founding of the Christian Church respec tively. It was held by him that
God is Father as He creates, Son as He redeems, and Holy Spirit as He
unites Himself to the Christian Church, but without the personality
which the Church doctrine ascribes to each of them. Sabellianism was
always at a loss to explain the Biblical truth that all things were
created by God through the Son and the Holy Spirit; for the divine
Persons must manifestly have existed before they could act. That was the
argument which of old the Patristic writers adduced with invincible
force against the Sabellian theory; and neither Sabellius in former
days, nor the Schleiermacher school in recent times, have done anything
to meet or answer it. The Jewish Church, though carefully trained,
failed at the decisive moment, from this Lias which had come to
predominate in it. And many have, in all ages, been engulfed by opinions
which impugned the Spirit's per sonality on the one hand, or questioned
His supreme Deity on the other. Of those who deviate from
Church-doctrine in our day, the majority are led by a strong Sabellian
bias, which,' while it admits that predicates of Deity are un doubtedly
ascribed to the Spirit, interprets these allusions as descriptive of a
mere influence or energy, or as attributes and manifestations of Deity
without the personal distinction in any form. This Sabellian view is at
present a theological current of greater force and wider diffusion than
is commonly suspected by theological readers in this country.

We shall endeavour in a dissertation, introductory to the six dogmatic
lectures afterwards given in proper form, to give an outline of the
Biblical testimony to the doctrine of the Holy Spirit. This will supply
an exegetical foundation.

## INTRODUCTORY DISSERTATION.

We shall first keep the Old Testament doctrine of the Spirit full in
view; and in tracing the stream of history, we shall consider (1) the
testimony to the spirit of prophecy in the Books of Moses and Job; (2)
in the time from Moses to David; (3) in the period from David to the
Exile; (4) from the Exile to the close of the Old Testament. But
underneath this mere chronological division, we shall have occasion to
notice the Spirit's operations in nature and in grace; in the
supernatural gifts conferred upon gifted men, and in the prophecies
relating to the Messiah prior to the Pentecostal economy.

## THE BOOKS OF MOSES AND JOB.

" The Spirit of God moved on the face of the waters " (Gen. i. 2). The
term Spirit (Ruacli) denotes a BREATH, a WIND, and also an intelligent
thinking Being. The designation " the Spirit of God," like the analogous
title " the Son of God," implies distinct personality, and indicates
that He is from God, or of God. The action here ascribed to Him, in
connection with the creation of all things, seems to be a metaphor taken
from the incubation of a bird, and sets forth how the Spirit, dove-like,
sat brooding o'er the dark abyss, and made it pregnant. 1 Milton, i. 21
and vii. 233.

" By His Spirit He garnished the heavens " (Job xxvi. 13). He is called
God's Spirit (" His Spirit") to show that He is of the same essence with
God and from Him. When it is said that He who garnished the heavens is
the Spirit of God, we are not warranted to interpret the words in any
other way than as a declaration that the personal Spirit —elsewhere
called the finger of God and the power of God —adorned the heavens, and
framed them to display the divine glory.

" The Spirit of God made me" says Elihu, " and the breath of the
Almifjlitij hath given me life" (Job xxxiii. 4). The reference to a
personal agent standing in a unique relation to God—that is, from God,
but personally distinct—is too express to be evaded by any subterfuge.

" Thou scndcst forth Thy Spirit, they are created ; and Thou rcncwcst
the face of the earth" (Ps. civ. 30). There the Psalmist speaks of God's
manifold works according to their order. He shows that God gives the
animals their food; that He hides His face and they are troubled; that
He takes away their breath and they die; that He sends forth His Spirit,
and a fresh succession or race of animated beings is created. The title
" Thy Spirit" distinguishes between the uncreated and the finite Spirit,
the Spirit of God being the fountain of life; and creation, amid all its
necessary changes, receives from Him its renovating and rejuvenating
power. The blossom and decay of vegetation; the succession of races on
the earth's surface; the bias impressed on various minds; the skill in
arts; tlie manifold gifts which hold society together,—are all His
workmanship.

### MAN MADE TO BE THE TEMPLE OF THE HOLY GHOST.

We come to the indwelling of the Spirit in primeval man, which may be
called the deep ground-thought of all right anthropology, as appears
from these words: " The Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground,
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life " (Gen. ii. 7). When
God breathed into man the breath of LIFE (or LIVES, for it is plural),
we must understand life in the Holy Spirit as well as animal and
intellectual life. Calvin, and the mass of commentators since his day,
have interpreted the words of the physical life, as if they intimated
nothing more than the animation of the clay figure. The Patristic
writers, Athanasius, Basil, Ambrose, and Cyril, refer the words to the
occasion when God com municated the Spirit, the breath of the Almighty,
the giver of the HIGHER as well as of the lower form of life. If further
proof of the correctness of this interpretation were necessary, it is
furnished by the contrast of DEATH threatened in the penalty, which
certainly cannot be limited to natural death. Adam had the Spirit in the
state of integrity, not only for himself, but for his seed; and he
walked after the Spirit as long as he stood in his integrity. I must
here refer a little more fully to the Spirit's work in connection with
the first Adam.

From the narrative of creation, brief but suggestive, which is given in
Genesis, the great thought is derived that, accord ing to the
constitution which God was pleased to give to the first man among the
creatures of His hand, not only was a federal unity assigned to him as
the head of the race, but a relation to the whole Trinity which comes to
light, in his being made in the image of God. That he not only bore a
likeness to God's perfections in his mental, moral, and reli gious
constitution, but that he was placed in a peculiarly CLOSE RELATION TO ALL THE PERSONS OF THE TRINITY, nay, in a conscious personal relation to all the divine Persons,— is clearly
intimated in the words: " Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness " (Gen. i, 26). The. use of the plural number in the pronoun us
is not to be reduced, according to the evacuating principle of
Eationalism, to a mere mannerism in style. Dr. Owen has well remarked
that God, having manifested by other parts of creation His existence,
nature, and perfections, designed in the creation of man to manifest
Himself in a trinity of persons; a remark setting forth a momentous
truth only too little pondered. For the right interpretation of many
passages of Scripture in their coherence and meaning, it is necessary to
take this thought along with us.

The question now raised in theological circles in reference to man is:
Did he, as God's creature, realize in any measure His idea ? And was he
the object of divine complacency not only as the partaker of a pure
nature, but as a Son who was then replenished, just as redeemed men are
again replenished, with the Holy Spirit ? Or, on the contrary, was he,
according to the Rationalistic theory, formed in a low and rude con
dition, though capable of advancing in an ascending scale, and
necessarily requiring even in his creation state some further
intervention to make him correspond to His idea ? On exegetical grounds
as well as on the ground of analogy, we must hold that man as he was
formed not only cor responded to His idea as a Son within the sphere of
creaturehood, but was the temple of the Holy Ghost. This is a view so
essential to all right conceptions of our primeval relationship, that
without it no sound anthropology can be maintained. The deep ground -
thought presupposed by Christianity is, that Adam had the divine image
and life from the Spirit of Life. It follows, accordingly, that the
elements were already deposited in him by which he was in a position to
reach the full perfection of his being, as he was. He needed only to
have further developed that which was already in him, and to abide the
probation under which he was placed.

The advocates of the Rationalistic conception of man— however variously
it may be modified, and however imposing some aspects of it may at first
sight appear—describe man's original state as commencing with a low
grade or type, and rising to a higher. But of all the forms in which
this baseless theory has been presented, by far the most attractive is
the novel theory supported, in our day, by many able men, that an
incarnation would have entered to complete the idea of man even though
no sin had ever entered to disturb the harmony of the universe. This
favourite speculation See Dorner's Doctrine of the Person of Christ;
Liebner, Martensen, Ebrard. of modern German theologians has ne Biblical
ground, but has a tendency to introduce a wholly different conception of
man's original state. It gives a false idea of his original integrity or
perfection. According to this theory, they postulate the necessity of an
incarnation to make man correspond to His idea; and what does that
supposition involve ? It necessarily implies imperfection in his very
constitution, and in the adaptation of the means to the end designed. It
reflects on the perfection of that nature in which our race was made.
Assuming that man was formed by the Creator in an imperfect and rude
state,— that is, without the elements that would have unfolded
themselves in the full efflorescence of his being,—it takes for granted
that the ideal of creation, without a new inter vention from above, must
have remained unrealized; that with all his natural powers exerted to
the utmost, and with all the aids provided for him in his original
sphere, he could not have completed his destiny without an intervention
wholly new and supplementary. If there still remained a further
extraordinary interposition to carry forward to com pleteness the act of
creation which, by the supposition, was left imperfect—or, at least,
unfinished—in kind as well as in degree; if nature required no mere
development within its assigned sphere into the perfection of its
capacities, but was left defective in its structure or mental
conformation from the first,—then everything most confidently accepted
by inspired and uninspired men from the beginning is seen in a cross
light and through a distorting medium. If imper fection, at least in the
sense of incompleteness, attached in such a degree to creation in its
normal state,—in other words, if it did not correspond to its
idea,—reason would be staggered. The moral problem of
responsibility—arduous enough as it is—would in that case be insoluble.
We could not speak of all as " very good " in its primordial state, nor
could we vindicate the ways of God to men. On the contrary, the
representations of man from a Biblical point of view are to the effect
that he had, from the first, realized and formed within him the divine
idea to such an extent that he needed nothing more than the required
probation in order to his being confirmed, and then exalted to an
immensely higher degree, according to the promised reward.

We naturally ask whether the first Adam had the Holy Spirit at his
creation. This must be affirmed whether we look at the exegetical
grounds, which we hold to be con clusive (Gen. ii. 7), or at the analogy
of the Second Adam. Though not denied in any quarter entitled to
respect, Patristic, llomish, or Protestant, it has never been taken up
in earnest by any divine of note, with the single exception of Howe,
whose Living Temple proceeds upon it as a postulate. The explanation of
that omission, from which not only anthropology but the doctrines of
grace have suffered not a little, may be the following. In a treatise
which long passed under the name of Augustin, there was a formal denial
of the position that Adam in his state of integrity was in the
possession of the Spirit. The great influence of Augustin's name, thus
supposed to pronounce a different judgment, seems mainly to have had the
effect of repressing due inquiry, and of blunting statements which would
other wise have been at once clearer, ampler, and less reserved in the
direction to which I have referred. That treatise, ascribed to Augustin,
Vitl. Quasi, cx ufroque Tr.stamento, Qutest. 123. contains, however, so
many gross mistakes and errors on many different points, and even on the
doctrines of grace, on which the views of Augustin were the most
pronounced, that any man might have detected the injury clone to him by
attributing such an unworthy composition to his pen. It is now with a
general concurrence of opinion rejected as spurious, and replete with
views which Augustin did not hold. The arguments from analogy which go
to prove that Adam had the Spirit are conclusive.

The doctrine that man was originally, though mutably, replenished with
the Spirit, may be termed the deep funda mental thought of the
Scripture-doctrine of man. If the first and second Adam are so related
that the first man was the analogue or figure of the second, as all
admit on the autho rity of Scripture , it is clear that, unless the
first man possessed the Spirit, the last man, the Healer or Restorer of
the forfeited inheritance, would not have been the medium of giving the
Spirit, who w r as withdrawn on account of sin, and who could be
restored only on - account of the everlasting righteousness which Christ
brought in (Eom. viii. 10). Sin separated between the soul and God; and,
according to the tenor of God's just and holy moral government, the
Spirit was of necessity withdrawn at the moment when Adam lent an ear to
the tempter's glozing seduction. And the privation to which man's nature
was subjected, as the term FLESH clearly shows (Gen. vi. 3), implies
that he had forfeited that fulness of the Spirit which he once
possessed, and which, but for sin, would have descended as an
inheritance to his posterity.

The arguments against the view that Adam had the Spirit are wholly
destitute of Biblical ground, and of no validity or weight. One
ill-understood text has been adduced to prove that Adam was not
replenished with the Spirit, viz.: " the first man Adam was made a
living soul; the last Adam was made a quickening Spirit" (1 Cor. xv.
45). That is the main argument in the spurious treatise ascribed to
Augustin. But that passage, when closely examined, is no absolute
antithesis; for the apostle aims to show that there is a natural body
and a spiritual body, the one before the other; the one inherited from
the first man, the other received from Him who is the quickening Spirit.
But the apostle says nothing against Adam being replenished with the
Spirit-nothing in favour of the notion which it was adduced to prove. On
the contrary, it is clear that man must have realized his idea, for God
pronounced all very good; and he had only to undergo the necessary
probation, which implied that his nature, from the first, was so perfect
that it might certainly have come out unhurt. Why, in fact, was there
any probation at all, if man at his creation was left without the Spirit
to guide and animate him ? and how could he be tried if he did not
answer his idea, as supplied with all that was requisite for the trial,
the successful issue of which would have placed him amid the glory and
incorruption of the resurrection state ?

There are two conclusions to which we must come: (1) Man as a creature,
but with a certain standing as a son in the beloved Son, was the object
of the divine complacency, though mutable; (2) His soul was inwardly
irradiated with the supernatural presence of the Holy Spirit, which
might have been retained. That man stood at first related to all the
persons of the Trinity, and bore the image of God, though mutably, upon
his soul; that the Spirit of Life filled him for a service of holy love,
may be accepted as a postulate in all our investigations — a postulate
which Christianity, as a restorative or remedial economy, will not
permit us to ignore, although it has never received the place to which
it is entitled in any system of anthropology—Patristic or Pro testant.
But it may be affirmed, on the ground of the analogy between the two
Adams, that Christ would not have been the medium of giving the Spirit,
if the first man had not possessed the Spirit. The Spirit departed from
the human family when Adam gave ear to the tempter's seducing words; and
the restoration by the second man implies the possession of the Spirit
by the first. No one, in fact, can read the action of Christ on the
first evening after His resurrection, and consider the symbolic
breathing on the disciples, and the words which fell from Him in
conveying a new gift of the Spirit, without an impression that these two
actions were counter parts —the one the original gift, the other the
restoration of what was lost.

The fall involved three things, which must be regarded as
presuppositions to the whole theme which we are now dis cussing :—

(1.) A captivity to Satan by right of conquest (Luke xi. 21).

(2.) A withdrawal of the Holy Spirit (Jude 19).

(3.) An entire corruption of man's nature, now called flesh, or the
flesh (Gen. vi. 3 ; John iii. 6).

No sooner had sin entered than we find the Mediator'carry ing out by His
Spirit the provisions of the remedial plan by announcing the tenor of
the gospel, and by putting enmity between the seed of the serpent and
the seed of the woman. There THE WORD AND THE SPIRIT are already in
conjunction, —the one filling the mind with truth, the other filling it
with spiritual life. From the first we have brought before us the ruin
and the remedy; then the two opposite families; then a marked revival in
the days of Enos ; then" as marked a declen sion. We hold it as
antagonistic to all Biblical doctrine to represent the first man, as the
Eationalistic theory uniformly represents him, as originally made on a
lower platform, and as always mounting higher.

" Illy Spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is
flesh " (Gen. vi. 3).—With whatever shade of meaning the word rendered
strive may be connected, the general import unquestionably is, that the
forbearance long exercised was about to close, that the antediluvians
had rejected the testi mony of the Spirit, addressed to them by
Spirit-filled men, and despised every call to repentance and faith. He
who thus speaks of His Spirit is undoultcclly Christ. This we learn from
Peter, the inspired commentator on the words in Genesis (1 Pet. iii.
19). The Spirit of Christ speaking by Enoch and Noah was about to leave
that corrupt generation,to its doom. The Messiah, having received the
Spirit by anticipation for the purposes of His kingdom, on the ground of
the coming atonement, had preached the gospel to them by the mouth of
Noah, and the message was impiously rejected. The Spirit of Christ, who
filled and animated all the prophets, had not only summoned them to
repentance, but testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ and the
glory that .should follow (1 Pet. i. 11).

We come next to Abraham, who was called to leave his country and
kindred, and received no fewer than eight theo-phanies. He was called a
prophet, and therefore he had the Spirit (Gen. xx. 6). The three
patriarchs, indeed, who are called the first-fruit and root of the
covenant people (Eom. xi. 16), evinced in many ways, and especially at
the close of life, the spirit of prophecy. In Joseph we see the same
gift continued, and it was made the means of preserving the Old
Testament Church; for the language of Pharaoh in reference to him was
plainly borrowed from Joseph himself, when he said: " Can we find such a
man as this—a man in whom the Spirit of God is ? " (Gen. xli. 38).

In reference to Moses, we find explicit statements that he was raised up
and qualified by the Spirit of God for his great commission. "When the
Lord, to relieve his heavy burden, associated seventy elders to bear
rule along with him, He said : " I will take of the Spirit that is upon
thee, and put it upon them" (Num. xi. 17). We see from that memorable
narra tive that the Spirit rested upon them as the spirit of prophecy, a
fact which accredited their commission. The incident con nected with
Eldad and Medad made that donation of the Spirit all the more
remarkable. It is said of Joshua, he was a man in whom was the Spirit;
for Moses had laid his hands on him (Num. xxvii. 18 ; Deut. xxxiv. 0).
Many passages in like manner speak of the Spirit of God coming upon men
in a supernatural way, that they might be equipped for official service.
The Spirit's work in this period is seen in many spiritually-minded men,
as well as in the supernaturally gifted few. The miraculous gifts which
at times were copiously given were but a sign, and might be withdrawn,
while the Spirit of Life remained. The same spirit of faith and the same
new nature were always found in a remnant forming the true Church of
God, in reference to which God said by Jeremiah : " I remember thee, the
kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest
after me in the wilderness" (Jer. ii. 2). The presence of the Spirit
appeared in the drops from heaven accompanying the Sinai covenant,
which, w r ith all its sternness and shadows, was a mode of
administering the covenant of grace (Ps. Ixviii. 8).

The Spirit is seen also in inspiring Moses to commit to writing the word
of God, the great outward means for pro moting the spiritual good of the
children of men. \^Ye see the Spirit's work, moreover, in all the
theophanies and audible voices, in all the prophecies and types
outwardly given; but we see it also in that spiritual illumination of
multitudes of true believers, which is far different from the inner con
sciousness of which our modern divines are fond of speaking. There are
two noteworthy passages which refer to the com forting power of the
Spirit during the wilderness sojourn, and which apply to the Church at
large, and not to the super naturally gifted few: (1) " Thou gavest also
Thy good Spirit to instruct them, and withheldest not Thy manna " (Xeh.
ix. 2 0) ; (2) " Where is He that put His Holy Spirit within him ?"
(Isa. Ixiii. 11); "As a beast goeth down to the valley, the Spirit of
the Lord caused him to rest" (ver. 14).

## FROM THE TIME OF MOSES TO DAVID.

The Spirit of God is not mentioned in the whole Book of Joshua. Joshua
himself, indeed, was full of the spirit of wisdom (Deut. xxxiv. 9).
After the elders who outlived Joshua had passed away, \\ve find the
indications of a great change.

In the Look of Judges, which ushers us into a period of declension,
repeated allusion is made to the fact that the Spirit of God came upon
men supernaturally gifted, and raised up for the deliverance of Israel.
The people from time to time did evil in the sight of the Lord; they
were delivered into the hand of some of the neighbouring nations; they
repented and ciied to the Lord—an alternating state of things which we
find pervading the entire book; and then a bold leader was raised up by
the Spirit of God to deliver them. Thus the Spirit of the Lord came upon
Othniel, and he judged Israel (Judg. iii. 10), upon Gideon (vi. 34),
upon Jephtha (xi. 29), upon Samson, a very mixed character, with
strong-faith, but with equally great personal defects all too marked
(xiv. 19). Then w r ar was waged successfully on the nations which had
oppressed them. The Spirit of God, the author of all those gifts which
they received, intellectual as well as spiritual, kindled in them
intrepid valour; for God was King of the Theocracy, and it redounded to
His glory to break the yoke of the oppressor, when the purposes of dis
cipline were served. One hero after another, endowed with extraordinary
courage, patriotism, and zeal, was raised up by the Spirit of God to
deliver Israel.

After the unquiet times of the judges, a period of marked revival
appears in the days of Samuel, the last of the judges. Xext to Moses,
Samuel, who walked with reformatory zeal and power in the steps of the
former, may be regarded as the greatest benefactor of the nation, which,
in the interval between the two, had forgotten the law, lost true
conceptions of God, sensualized His worship, and become enfeebled by
irreligiou and vice. In a higher sense than could be affirmed of any
other of the judges, Samuel was a deliverer of the nation; for he
delivered it from irreligion, ignorance, and vice. 
This was a transition - period to the nourishing times of the Israelitish kingdom. When the
Spirit came upon Samuel at a time when God imparted to him one theophany
after another, a new state of things was introduced. The spirit of
prophecy filled Samuel in a peculiar way (1 Sam. x. 20), and from his
time downwards an order or school of prophets arose. A whole line of
prophets, not in succession like the priesthood, but in a succession of
a higher order, appeared to guide the future history of Israel. We are
thus supplied with a true idea of the nature of prophecy, on which we
can cast only a passing glance, because a full description of this
remarkable institution would demand a far more many-sided inquiry than
either our aim or our limits will permit.

The prophet required for the duties of his function the inspiration and
guidance of the Holy Ghost. He personally represented the cause of God,
and viewed historical events of every class in relation to Jehovah and
His law. Hence his message was largely the proclamation of warnings and
menaces, or the burden of the Lord, which the ungodly often turned into
ridicule. He was the organ of the Holy Spirit; and it was the impulse
imparted by the Spirit of God that animated and enlightened him. The
Lord Jesus by the Spirit, dispensed by anticipation for the purposes of
His king dom, on the ground of the future atonement, revealed Himself to
their Spirit, moving them to speak and act, and also to write when an
addition was to be made to the Old Testament canon. It was not according
to their will that they either spoke or continued silent. Like a musical
instrument which gives out its tones only as it is struck, they simply
obeyed as the Spirit acted on each prophetic mind at His pleasure, using
all those peculiar gifts or aptitudes with which He had endowed the
different individuals for the end He had in view, and which were called
into activity only so far as they were moved by the Holy Ghost (2 Pet.
i. 21); and hence they acted as God's servants, or as His mouth,
whenever they spoke the words of God (Ex. iv. 16; 2 Kings ix. 7). The
prophet, accordingly, is described as a man of the Spirit, who felt
himself apprehended by the Spirit (Hos. ix. 7); and a discretionary
commission was never entrusted to him. God never deposited the gracious
supplies of His Spirit in Churches, ministry, or ordinances. Nor did it
run counter to this undoubted truth when Elisha asked and obtained a
double portion of Elijah's spirit. The request amounted to nothing more
than this: that the same Spirit that dwelt in the departing prophet
might by the dispensation of God's free gift dwell in a large measure
also in him; much like the arrangement according to which the first-born
got a double portion of the inheritance.

The influence wielded by these Spirit-filled men was great. They were
watchmen and shepherds (Isa. xxi. 11; Zech. xi. 3). As contrasted with
what was merely political, they repre sented the spiritual elements of
the kingdom of God; and as contrasted with the frequently secularized
priests, with their outward forms and sacrifices, they laid emphasis on
the fear of God (Isa. i. 11-15 ; 1 Sam. xv. 22). Again, as compared with
the kings, who often leant on an arm of flesh, the pro phets, men of the
Spirit, uniformly counselled trust, not in confederacies, but in the God
of Israel (Isa. viii. 12).

Into the mode of giving prophecy it is needless to inquire, for it was
simply miraculous, and therefore inscrutable. They who received this
gift had an intimation of the divine will, and therefore received
something that they had not before. They performed what was competent
only to those who were inspired, and therefore announced something not
directly communicated to the rest of the people. No prophet alleged that
he obtained from God the gift or the aptitude of intimat ing the divine
will, or of foretelling future events at his dis cretion. That power or
capacity was never given to them. Thus Jeremiah expressly said that he
knew not that they had devised devices against him (Jer. xi. 18). Daniel
denied that he knew the dream or the interpretation by any wisdom of his
own; and it was in answer to prayer that the secret, which no wise man
or astrologer could ever have discovered, was made known to him (Dan.
ii. 19, 30). It is clear that the prophets never wished it to be
understood that they gave forth their predictions as the result of their
own wisdom. On the contrary, they declared that God alone knew future
and contingent events; and that He claimed this knowledge as His
absolute prerogative (Isa. xliL 9). The word of the Lord, moreover, came
only at certain times. The prophets never supposed, nor did the
Israelites believe, that the power of prophecy was possessed by any man
as a constant or unin terrupted gift. This sufficiently shows that the
writers of the Old Testament understood that the Spirit of God was a
personal agent, that He was very God.

When we put all these facts together, it is clear that the Spirit of God
is something distinct from the prophet's mind, and from any natural
capacity with which he was endowed. We nowhere read that God first
revealed something to the Holy Spirit as if He were not consubstantial
with God Him self, and then charged Him to convey the communication to
the prophet. On the contrary, while there is a certain order of
subsistence and operation in the Godhead, the Spirit of God is always
spoken of as possessing divine intelligence, omnipotence, and
omnipresence: and all the prophecies are uniformly spoken of as the
immediate act of God Himself. The personal Holy Spirit, or the Prophetic
Spirit, is called '•' The Spirit of God " in the Books of Samuel.

The result of our investigation up to this point demon strates that the
Spirit of God is not a virtue or excellency of the human spirit which is
to be sought and obtained from God. That theory of the modern theology
^[By a perversion of all sound exegesis, DIEHL, in the Jaarboeken voor Weten-scliappdijke Theologie, 1850, and KLEINERT, in the Studien und Kritiken, explain away all these texts. So also do vox CÖLLN, STEUDEL, etc., in treating of Old Testament theology.]
is utterly base less. In the very oldest books of Scripture, and in all
the stream of history downwards, THE SPIRIT OF GOD is always introduced
as the Personal Creative Spirit of God.


## FROM THE RISE OF DAVID TO THE EXILE.

The number of sacred books which appeared during this period is large.
They include the Psalms in good measure, the writings of Solomon, Hosea,
Joel, Micah, Isaiah, in all which we have express allusions to the Holy
Spirit. And in tracing out the doctrine in these books we shall not
permit ourselves to be swayed by that evacuating criticism which either
breaks up the books into parts and fragments, or takes no account of the
light reflected on the record as a whole by the supplementary and
authoritative teaching of Christ and His apostles.

"When David was anointed by Samuel to be king, we read: " The Spirit of
the Lord came upon David from that day for-ivard" (1 Sam. xvi. 13). His
soul was so filled with the consciousness of his high destiny, and with
the animating power and presence of the Spirit of God, that he became a
different man. He was not only filled with the office-gifts necessary
for rule, but was faithful to the principles which devolved on him as
the subordinate under-king of a divine Theocracy. The same Spirit that
ennobled and guided him abandoned Saul.

Nor must we forget the inspiration given to him. " The Spirit of the
Lord spake ly me, and His uord ivas in my tonyue" (2 Sam. xxiii. 2). He
received divine communica tions, intelligible enough to him as a prophet
(Acts ii. 30), as to the birth and sufferings, the death, the
resurrection, and glory of his greater seed, or offspring, all which are
wrought into the Psalms. He refers in that closing utterance to the
prophetic Spirit which had rested on him, and he virtually announces: "
All my Psalms were composed by the inspira tion and guidance of the
Spirit of the Lord."

But while these allusions to the Spirit are of a more public and
official character, there are others in which we trace the Spirit's
operations upon himself as a regenerate and sanctified man :

" Whither shall I (jo from Thy Spirit ? or whither shall I flee from Thy
presence ?" (Ps. cxxxix. 7). In this psalm, which may have been prepared
before he ascended the throne, the omnipresence and omniscience which
are affirmed of God are also declared to be equally the attributes of
the Spirit of God. The psalm sets forth a gracious and beneficent omni
presence. It is only learned trifling, all too plainly betray ing an
unchristian bias, when it is expounded as meaning: " Whither shall I go
from Thy stormy wind." The allusion is to the personal Spirit—" Thy
Spirit"—graciously omni present in all the universe to the believing
mind. This is not a flight of imagination.

In the 51st Psalm David prays: "Take not Thy Holy Spirit from me" (Ps.
li. 11). David had grievously sinned, and in that psalm, which contains
the expression of his repentance, he penitently prays that the Holy
Spirit may not be taken from him. Previous to his fall he must have
tasted the joy of God's salvation, and possessed that free Spirit, when
he pleads with such a vehement desire for its restoration. Here, for the
first time, we have the epithet HOLY connected with the Spirit of God.
He is not only the Spirit of wisdom and the Spirit of power, but the
Holy Spirit. And in another psalm He is designated the GOOD Spirit.

" Thy Spirit is good: lead me" or " let Thy good Spirit lead me into the
land of uprightness" (Ps. cxliii. 10). He prayed that the same good
Spirit that had always led him might lead him still. "We cannot depart
from the usual meaning of the expression " THY SPIRIT," as alluding to
the personal Holy Ghost.

The unction and fragrance of the Spirit with which the Psalms are
replete lead me to notice, before leaving this portion of our survey,
that it is an utter misconception to represent the Old Testament
religion as more fed by mundane hopes than by the influence of the Holy
Spirit. It is to pervert the plainest evidence to affirm, as Cocceius
and his school affirmed, that there was neither sonship nor the spirit
of adoption in the Old Testament Church. That was to ignore the
Abrahamic Covenant, and Christ's divine presence with His Church, and
merely to fix all attention upon the intermediate and transitory Sinai
Covenant. But the Psalms to which we are adverting, when considered as
the actual expression of praise for the Israelitish Church, as well as a
legacy handed down to us in the Christian Church, sufficiently refute
that view. No book of a similar kind was prepared for the New Testament
Church. The Holy Spirit, replenishing the sweet singers of Israel with
spiritual truth and holy love, anticipated in this way much of the
necessity that should be felt in Christian times. I am not here
discussing the debated point as to the use of psalms in public worship.
My object is to show the spirituality of the Israelitish Church as
evinced by its inspired and invaluable psalms. They describe the
eternity and omnipresence, the majesty and condescension, the justice
and mercy of God in a strain of the most fervid devotion. They sing of
repentance and faith, of joy in God and delight in God's law, with an
ardour beyond which it is impossible to go. They depict Christ's royal
reign and His union with His Church; the anointing with the oil of
gladness (Ps. xlv. 7); the receiving of gifts for men (Ps. Ixviii. 18);
and the supreme dominion with which Christ was to be invested by the
Father with a tenderness, unction, and joy, to which no other words are
equal. And those psalms which are called " new songs" anticipate the
full millennial glory.

To reason back from effect to cause, the power and presence of the
Spirit in ample fulness must have been graciously conferred to produce
these psalms, and to use them fitly when prepared. We trace the power of
God's Spirit in turning the captivity of Israel, and in filling them
with penitence. Not only so : the apostle, when adducing the quotation
from the Psalms, " I believed, therefore have I spoken," prefixes " We
having the same spirit of faith —we also believe and therefore speak "
(2 Cor. iv. 13 ; Ps. cxvi. 10). The language of the apostle affirms the
same faith and the possession of the same Spirit. From this fact, and
from the whole series of quotations made from them, it is evident that
the experience of the Church was the same in both economies, though
complexions! varieties attached to each. But these varieties, as Calvin
^[See Calvin's admirable remarks on Gal. iv. 1, etc.] well remarks, describe the Church more in its corporate character than
in the experience of the individual members. The true Church in the Old
Testament, whatever might be the character of the nominal adherents,
cannot be said to be unspiritual when we trace a faith and a knowledge
of God, a fidelity and courage, an endurance and self-denial in all that
great cloud of witnesses that fill us with astonishment, and leave us
conscious that we are practically far behind.

When we peruse the sacred writings which carne from the hand of Solomon,
we find not only evidence of the Spirit's illumination, but express
reference to the Spirit in connection with the preacher's words: Turn
you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my Spirit unto you (Prov. i.
23). He means the graces of the indwelling Spirit, which were enjoyed
then as well as now.

We come now to the writings of the PROPHETS expressly so called. And in
these we find many allusions to the Spirit of God. If we classify them,
we may say (1) that some of them refer to the time then present, and to
the way in which the Spirit helped the prophets to fulfil their office;
(2) that some refer to the great effusion, when the Spirit should be
poured upon the Church from on high ; (3) that some refer to the unction
awaiting the Messiah, which was the great central thought of the Jewish
religion, as it is of all revealed religion.

HOSEA, the oldest writing prophet perhaps, and placed at the head of the
minor prophets, speaks of " the man of the Spirit" (Hos. ix. 7).
"Whether, with many expositors, we refer the words to the boastful
language of the false prophets, or refer them to the perplexity of the
true prophets in a time of apostasy, such as Hosea encountered among the
ten tribes, they bring out the general notion entertained in regard to
the prophets, that they were men of the Spirit.

JOEL, sent about the same time to Judah, gives the prediction respecting
the great outpouring of the Spirit which was reserved for the last days:
" and it shall come, to pass after-ward, that I will pour out my Spirit
upon all flesh" (Joel ii. 28). The Spirit, called by the divine speaker
"my Spirit," is the Holy Spirit promised in connection with Messianic
times. According to the New Testament quotation, there is a shade of
meaning not to be lost in the words " of my Spirit" (aTro),
distinguishing between the measure vouchsafed to men and the
inexhaustible fulness in the resources of the fountain. The expression :
" / will pour out" can refer only to the Lord, from whom the Spirit
proceeds and by whom He is sent. The Lord God, who dwelt in the midst of
His Church, promised that He would amply com pensate it for the reproach
of barrenness by imparting the copious supply of His Spirit. There is
one party who sends and another who is poured out, personally distinct,
but not different in essence. And this gracious promise as to the
outpouring of the Spirit, when read in the full light of Xew Testament
times, must be regarded as fulfilled at Pentecost, and the blessing as
dispensed by the MESSIAH, the Son of God. This must be ascribed to the
incarnate Son, in whom all fulness dwells, and the effusion itself
consists in the communication of the Holy Spirit by His gracious
presence and operation.

Plainly we are to understand the ordinary as well as the extraordinary
gifts of the Spirit. The effects flowing from that effusion of the
Spirit were prophetic gifts to be con ferred on the New Testament Church
as well as on its several members ; one and the same Spirit distributing
to every one severally, according to His will. Joel divides the gifts
into three classes—prophecy, dreams, and visions. There are various
interpretations of these three promised gifts ; but the allusion is to
different forms of revelation. As to PEOPHECY, it is either taken more
generally for an intimation of the divine will, or more strictly for the
prediction of future events by the aid of the Holy Spirit. As to DREAMS,
they were certain images presented to the mind in sleep, and understood
by the Spirit's interpretation in such a way that no doubt was
entertained either as to their import or their origin. As to VISIONS,
they were appearances submitted to the eye or to the cognitive faculty,
and must be understood as immediate revelations while the seer was
asleep or awake.

But neither are we to exclude the ordinary and sanctifying gifts of the
Spirit. This appears, beyond dispute, from the fact that, according to
the intention of the supreme Dispenser of them, that shower of heavenly
gifts, which filled the mind of those to whom they were promised, was
meant to lead them, to a true invocation derived from faith, or to "
call on the name of the Lord." They were converting and sanctify ing
gifts, such as faith, hope, love, and invocation. They were also
ministerial gifts for awakening and edifying the mind of others.

Consider what is intimated by the ALL FLESH, on whom this gracious
effusion of the Spirit was to be conferred. When we ask what was meant
by Joel's prophecy that the Spirit was to be poured upon ALL FLESH, the
allusion cannot be, as Grotius held, to worthy Israelites. Nor can it be
limited, as Origen limits it, to Churches gathered from the Gentiles.
The term ALL is sometimes used in Scripture to denote classes; and hence
we find Chrysostom, Luther,

Gerhard, referring it to classes of individuals, but restricting it to
the display of supernatural gifts at the commencement day of the Xew
Testament Church. In this sense it will mean men of every sort
replenished at Pentecost with the extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit—every age, sex, and con dition. But the promise CANNOT BE LIMITED
TO THAT DAY, nor to the miraculous gifts then communicated. This appears
from the apostle's commentary when he said: " Repent and be baptized
every one of you, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Acts
ii. 38),—where the reference is plainly to the sanctifying gifts of the
Spirit and to His gracious inhabi tation. And he added that the promise
was to them, and to their children, and to all that were afar off.
Others, as Glassius, make it men of every class in all nations. While
the MIRACULOUS GIFTS, specially given to organize and found the Church,
must be regarded as, in part, the accomplishment of Joel's prophecy, THE
SAVING AND SANCTIFYING GIFTS must also be included down to the latest
times. The phrase " upon all flesh" implies all nations, without
distinction: for God was to pour out His Spirit on all nations, without
distinction of Jew and Gentile, the partition-wall being taken down. No
distinction was to be made, either in SOCIAL CONDITION or in
NATIONALITY, as was intimated by the promise that the gifts should
descend on old men and young, on sons and daughters, on servants and
handmaids.

A question here arises: Are we to conclude that Joel's prophecy was
fulfilled on the day of Pentecost, or was that outpouring of the Spirit
but the symbol and dawn of another fulfilment yet to come ? That it w T
as fulfilled on Pentecost, ought not to be doubtful to any one who reads
Peter's sermon at the descent of the Spirit (Acts ii. 16). It was the
opening of the river of the water of life which will flow on for ever.
Where should we find a proof of Christ's Messiahship, or of the
Christian Church,—as contrasted with the Israelitish community still
adhering to the covenant at Sinai,—if the

fulfilment of Joel's prophecy did not take place, as Peter declared it
did, on that Pentecost immediately following the Lord's ascension ? That
was not A MERE TYPE OF ANOTHER FULFILMENT. For neither Joel nor any
other prophet speaks of any more definite fulfilment. Besides, Peter
expressly pointed to this as the fulfilment. But the fulfilment is A
GERMINANT FULFILMENT, which takes in all subsequent times. The effusion
was not an abruptly terminated fact. It was not a type: for shadows and
types have ceased. It is the issuing forth of the river of the water of
life (Ezek. xlvii. 1).

ISAIAH and MICAH, contemporary prophets in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and
Hezekiah, refer, in various passages, very emphatically to the Spirit of
God. I adduce Micah first in order. He had to combat the false prophets
who made the people err, and who cried peace (iii. 5); for false
prophets appeared among the people, and were permitted, for holy ends,
to try the faithfulness of Israel in the course of God's moral
government (2 Pet. ii. 1). And the princes, as well as the people, were
swayed by their flattering words. Hence the princes sometimes enjoined
silence on the true prophet, saying, Prophesy not (Mic. ii. 6). When it
is said: " Is the Spirit of the Lord straitened ?" (Mic. ii. 7), that
was the prophet's stern answer to those who would silence him. He
intimates: Is the Spirit of the Lord so weakened and straitened that He
dare not reprove you, or does He fail of resources to make His voice and
authority felt ? Will the divine Spirit yield to your presumptuous will
? And when he says: " / am full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, and
of judgment, and of might, to declare to Jacob his transgressions "
(Mic. iii. 8), that is an announcement in the same tone. The prophet,
with power and courage derived from the Spirit of the Lord, declares to
the nation its sin; and though the nation resents the reproof, and would
avoid, if possible, the summons to hear its stern tenor, it must be
compelled to hear it. The prophet, nerved by the Spirit of the Lord,
compels attention to his words. The Spirit and power are conjoined as
cause and effect, but distinguished. The prophet was also full of
judgment by the same Spirit, that is, with the capacity of discerning
the evil and the good in human actions, full of might or resolute
perseverance also by the same Spirit.

ISAIAH has scattered throughout his prophecies allusions to the Spirit
so manifold and various, in express descriptions and in brief turns of
phrase, that it might not be difficult to put together, from his words,
the complete doctrine of the Spirit. I shall briefly glance at the
outline which he gives.

​(a) He speaks of the Holy Spirit more generally. In the past history of
Israel which he gives, the prophet shows that the nation in their
wilderness-life was graciously supplied with the Spirit, and that He
dwelt among them and gave them rest (Isa. Ixiii. 11 and 14); but they
rebelled against Him, and vexed His Holy Spirit (ver. 10). Events
occurring in the moral government of God—such as the gathering of the
vultures to their prey—are also ascribed to the Spirit as the executive
of all the divine purposes: "My mouth it hath commanded, and His SPIRIT
it hath gathered them" (Isa. xxxiv. 16). The purging of Jerusalem from
defilement and blood is also ascribed to the spirit of judgment and
burning; that is, to the Spirit of God acting as the author and cause of
all these effects, which are not penal, but gracious (Isa. iv. 4).
Sinners taking counsel, but not of God, that they may take their own
way, are said to cover with a covering—or to shelter themselves under a
shelter and protection—which is not OF GOD'S SPIRIT ; that is, they ran
counter to the dissuasives and warnings which the prophet addressed to
them (Isa. xxx. 1).

​(5) Isaiah's allusions to the Spirit's work as the anointer of the
Messiah with the necessary unction for His office, are particularly
noteworthy. He introduces the Servant of the Lord saying: " And now the
Lord God has sent me and His Spirit" (Isa. xlviii. 1C). This is a much
preferable translation to that of the Authorized Version, which is here
faulty. The rendering we have accepted is preferable, and has been
followed by some of the best exegetes, such as Cocceius, Vitringa, and
Larape. One conclusive argument which may be adduced against the
Authorized Version is, that the mission of Christ is never ascribed to
the Spirit; and that the Persons of the Trinity, who are all referred to
in the passage, invariably act according to their order of subsistence
in the Godhead. The Spirit is here said to be sent along with the Son,
and indissolubly conjoined with the Son from the moment of the
incarnation. In pre-Christian times the same order prevails by
anticipation.

There are several passages in Isaiah which vividly set forth the large
measure of the Spirit, which was to be shed upon the Christ from the
time of His coming in the flesh. This was prefigured by various
anointings introduced into the typical economy. And it appears
especially in the name MESSIAH, THE ANOINTED, given to the promised One
who should come into the world.

" The, Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon Him, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge
and fear of the Lord " (Isa. xi. 2).

" Belwld my Servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul
delighted; I have put my Spirit upon Him " (Isa. xlii. 1).

" The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me ; because the Lord hath anointed
me to preach good tidings to the meek" etc. (Isa. Ixi. 1).

I have put these three passages together because they refer to the
unction with which the Lord Jesus was to be anointed for His threefold
office as Mediator between God and man; and though couched in the words
of prophecy, no clearer language could possibly have been used to
delineate the accomplished fact. The gift of the Spirit to replenish
Christ's humanity was not to supersede the necessity of His higher or
divine nature, for these supplies of the Spirit flowed from the
hypostatic union. The Spirit Himself was to REST upon Him, which implies
something far greater than a temporary visit, or a mere creature's
privilege. Then follows a vivid description of the effects of that
unction in six definite predicates, or three pairs,—the spirit of wisdom
and under standing, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of under
standing and fear of the Lord; graces of which the Spirit of God is the
sole author, and which are found only in their perfection and ample
fulness in the Messiah. The graces of the Spirit there enumerated are
six: but the general designa tion, " the Spirit of the Lord shall rest
upon Him," with which the promise commences, is the common name for the
SPIRIT OF PROPHECY, as appears from the seventy elders, who received the
spirit that was on Moses, and other instances. We may be warranted to
number, then, the spirit of prophecy first, and say that the number
SEVEN is preserved. Lampe, in commenting on this passage, gives perhaps
undue rein to his fancy when he supposes that the first pair was given
at the nativity, the second at His baptism, the third at His exalta tion
; and he thinks that the spirit of knowledge and fear of the Lord must
be regarded as poured out upon His Church. He appears to have adopted
this ingenious but unnatural view of the last pair, from the groundless
idea that the fear of the Lord could not fitly be ascribed to the Lord
Christ.

These three passages which we have put together delineate and foretell
that unction of the Holy Spirit with which the Messiah was to be
equipped for all His offices. The second passage is applied to Christ by
Matthew (chap. xii. 18). The third is quoted and applied by Christ
Himself (Luke iv. 17). The three passages, by a memorable variety of
expression, set forth that the Spirit should rest vpon Him, should be
put upon Him, should he, upon Him as the anointing oil. The human nature
of Christ was thus to be anointed with the plenary , . supply of the
Holy Spirit for the discharge of the mediatorial function: for it was
predicted as the necessary unction of the Servant of the Lord.

​(c) Another class of passages in Isaiah refers to the gift of the
Spirit to the Church. How far the prophet was able to trace the
connection between the gift of the Spirit to the personal Messiah and
the gift of the Spirit to the Church, or to follow the order of events
by which the one paved the way for the other, we do not presume to
inquire. But that the Spirit was to be plenteously conferred on the
Church in Messianic days, is repeatedly and explicitly affirmed by the
prophet. Thus the pouring out of water and the pouring out of the Spirit
are synonymous: " I will pour water on him that is thirsty, and floods
upon the dry ground : / will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thine offspring " (Isa. xliv. 3).

Two other passages may here be quoted,—one showing how the Spirit
resists the enemy, the other how He abides with the redeemed Church. (1)
" When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord
shall lift up a standard against him" (Isa. lix. 19). (2) "My Spirit
that is upon thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart," etc. (lix. 21).

## FROM THE BEGINNING OF THE EXILE TO THE END OF THE OLD TESTAMENT CANON.

To this period belong not a few books which are of a historical and
prophetic character,—viz. Ezekiel, Daniel, Haggai, and Zechariah, the
Books of Chronicles, and Xehemiah. In these we find many allusions to
the Holy Spirit.

There are two prophets, indeed, in this period, where the expression "
Spirit of God " does not occur,—viz. Jeremiah and Daniel. JEREMIAH, as a
man, is described as sanctified from the womb; and, as a prophet, he
received some of the most definite revelations ever communicated,
particularly the revelation of the New Covenant, with all its spiritual
pro visions and blessings (Jer. xxxi. 31). Yet we do not find in him the
precise phrase which we have here been making it our object to trace
out. The same thing holds true of DANIEL. Though we cannot fail to
perceive the Spirit's agency in all his interpretations of dreams, in
all his visions of the future, and in all the allusions found in him to
the anointing of Christ the Most Holy (Dan. ix. 24), yet the phrase
"Spirit of God " is not found in him.

In the writings of EZEKIEL, the expression, " the Spirit," " the Spirit
of God," or " my Spirit," very frequently occurs. Thus the prophet says:
" The Spirit entered into me" (ii. 2); " The Spirit entered into me, and
set me upon my feet, and spake with me" (ii. 24) ; " The Spirit lifted
me up, and took me away" (ii. 14); "The Spirit brought me in the visions
of God to Jerusalem " (viii. 3); " Afterwards the Spirit took me up, and
brought me in a vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of the
captivity" (xi. 24). And all the great promises announced by Ezekiel
have very express refer ence to the converting and sanctifying grace of
the Spirit pro mised to Israel in connection with their restoration to
the divine favour. Whether all is still future, or whether the promise
to put the Spirit within them was fulfilled on their return from
Babylon, has long been a point on which conflict ing views prevail: " /
will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be dean: from all your
filthincss, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you. A new heart
also will I (jive you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I
will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an
heart of flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, ami cause you to
walk in my statutes, and ye slutll keep my judgments, and do them "
(Ezek. xxxvi. 25-27). Grotius, Greenhill, and others incline to the
opinion which connects the fulfilment of the prophecy with the simple
restoration of the remnant who came back from their seventy years' exile
in Babylon; others absolutely connect the prophecy with the future.
Perhaps it may best be regarded as a germinant prediction, having a
partial or incipient accomplishment, and a full and complete accom
plishment. It certainly sets forth, as a consequence of the new heart
which should be given, and of the Spirit which should be put within the
Israelitish Church and nation, a remarkable change of disposition,
character, and manners which should be produced. The promised sprinkling
with clean water is the reality of what was typified by the water
mingled with the ashes of the heifer, which was to be sprinkled upon
persons and things to purify those who were defiled, and to render them
clean and holy in the eye of the law (Num. xix. 2). The inward renewing
of the people from moral and spiritual defects, indissolubly connected
with the former, though distinguished from it, is emphatically ascribed
to the irresistible grace of the Spirit of God. The agency used in
taking away the insensibility of the stony heart, and making it a heart
of flesh, susceptible and tender, is expressly ascribed to the Spirit
within them.

Two other memorable prophecies denote the same thing, though couched in
highly figurative language, and given in the form of vision,—the
reanimation of the dry bones in the valley of vision, when the prophet
was commanded to prophesy to the Spirit (Ezek. xxxvii. 1); and the rapid
outflow of waters, swelling into a river, from under the threshold of
the house of God (chap, xlvii. 1), which seems elsewhere to be called
the river of the water of life (Eev. xxii. 1).

The prophecy of HAGGAI announced for the comfort of the Israelitish
Church, that though the external glory of the second temple should be
inconsiderable as compared with the first temple, they were to entertain
no fear, because THE SPIRIT should remain among them, a help in their
infirmities, as well as the source of grace, of light, of comfort, and
of holiness (Hag. ii. 5).

In the prophet ZECHARIAH we find two explicit allusions to the Spirit's
agency,—one for the time of the prophet, another for the remote future
of the chosen people. Amid discouragements which might otherwise have
depressed Zerub-babel the ruler, the prophet was commissioned to show—
(1) that the maintenance of the Church was not dependent on the
resources of worldly kingdoms, but on God's Spirit: " Not by might, nor
ly power, but Inj my Spirit, saith the, Lord of Hosts" (Zech. iv. 6).
And this assurance was fortified by the significant and suggestive
vision of the candlestick and of the two olive trees. (2) Another
promise of the Spirit was to the effect that He should be the Spirit of
grace and sup plication to the house of David in the latter days, and
effect the national conversion of the people amid the deepest ex
pressions of sorrow and mourning (Zech. xii. 10).

We have only further to notice the allusions to the Holy Spirit in
NEHEMIAH and in the Book of CHRONICLES. In Xehemiah it is said, with
special reference to the way in which the Jewish nation vexed the Spirit
during their day of merciful visitation : " Many years didst Thou
forbear them, and tcstificdst against them BY THY SPIRIT in the prophets
" (Neh. ix. 30). The passage means that the Holy Spirit moved the
prophets, and spoke by them as organs whom He conde scended to employ in
the revelation of His mind and will. The allusions to the Holy Spirit in
the Book of Chronicles record two historical occasions when the Spirit,
coming on the prophets Jahaziel and Zechariah, prompted them to declare
the mind of God. The one was a great crisis, when Jahaziel awakened the
people's courage and confidence in God in the immediate prospect of a
great battle (2 Chron. xx. 14). The other was an equally great crisis,
when the prophet Zecha riah, filled with the Spirit, was commissioned to
reprove the people for their sins, but fell a victim to their fierce and
fiery resentment (2 Chron. xxiv. 20).

All these memorable instances in the history of Israel •which we have
surveyed, disclose to us the Holy Spirit in the work of imparting the
superhuman gift of prophecy to a few, and the comforting power of the
Spirit to the many. The Old Testament Church was in many respects
different from the New Testament Church, the former being more occupied
with externals, the latter being privileged to have a worship which may
be described as more in spirit and in truth. But the divine personality
of the Spirit, as we have clearly seen, was not less known and not less
recognised in the one economy than in the other. He who spoke by holy
men from the beginning was in every age recognised as a DIVINE PERSON.

## THE TESTIMONY TO THE SPIRIT IN THE GOSPELS AND BOOK OF ACTS

A long pause ensued from the last of the prophets to the time when the
Spirit of God again spoke by revelation. After an interval of nearly
four hundred years the long-expected time of fulfilment arrived, and we
no sooner take up the evangelist's narrative of the incarnation than we
find, as was to be expected, the same important place occupied by the
Holy Spirit. We shall endeavour here again to give an out line of the
Scripture testimony in the same historical way.

It will be found, on examination, that the Holy Spirit is referred to
more or less copiously by every New Testament writer. Not only so; there
is not a single New Testament book drawn up as a public document for the
Church which does not contain a marked, though often brief, allusion to
the Holy Spirit, and very frequently, if not always, in connection with
the main design or scope which the writer had in view. The only
exceptions are found in the three small Epistles of a more private
nature,—the Epistle to Philemon, and the Second and Third Epistles of
John. In every book more spe cially prepared for public and
ecclesiastical use, the allusion to the Spirit is most explicit. It will
be my object, without attempting a commentary on all these passages,
which would

carry us over too vast a field, to put together the cumulative evidence
which they supply. Except in some passages which cannot be passed over
without fuller elucidation, a few words of comment will for the most
part suffice.

All the evangelists refer to the Holy Spirit in connection with the
birth, baptism, and temptation of our Lord. Of all the New Testament
writers, next to Paul, Luke most fre quently reverts to it. We should be
disappointed, however, if we sought in him a full explanation of the
nature and pro perties of the Spirit, when his principal object was to
sketch the supernatural and miraculous works of the Spirit in the first
founding of Christianity. There was no denial and no dispute at that
time as to the divine personality of the Holy Spirit.

We find that the doctrine of the Spirit taught by the Baptist, by
Christ, and by the apostles, was in every respect the same as that with
which the Old Testament Church was familiar. We nowhere find that their
Jewish hearers on any occasion took exception to it. The teaching of our
Lord and His apostles on this topic never called forth a question or an
opposition from any quarter,—a plain proof that on this subject nothing
was taught by them which came into collision with the sentiments and
opinions which up to that time had been accepted and still continued to
be current among the Jews. The fundamental idea connected with the
Messiah, that He SHOULD BE ANOINTED WITH THE SPIRIT, was still an
undoubted doctrine; nor were the apostles ever compelled to meet doubts
or to disarm opposition in the Jewish mind on this point.

The title CHRIST or MESSIAH was given to the Redeemer from the peculiar
unction of the Spirit conferred on Him, which was unique in nature and
in degree. The different servants of God who were filled with the
Spirit, but in a far other way, illustrate this remark by contrast. To
begin with, the promise which the angel Gabriel gave respecting the
Baptist. He was to be filled with the Holy Ghost even from his mother's
womb, and go before the Lord Jesus in the Spirit and power of Elias
(Luke i. 15-17). The words mean that he should be FILLED and immediately
directed by the Spirit in the discharge of his prophetic function, and
that though he did not work miracles like Elijah, for obvious reasons,
he was supplied with gifts of wisdom and courage, holiness, zeal, and
power, for the purpose of proclaiming the law and gospel to a corrupt
and self-righteous generation. Of Elizabeth, Zacharias, and Simeon we
read that they were FILLED with the Holy Ghost, and gave forth inspired
announcements of the divine will (Luke i. 42, 6 7, ii. 2 5). But with
Christ it was wholly different. The infinite fulness of the Spirit which
was given to Him was constant and uninterrupted, and the result of the
hypostatic union—that is, was the effect of humanity being assumed into
personal union by the only-begotten Son. The Baptist, going before Him
in the Spirit and power of Elijah, combined the two thoughts when he
announced a Person pre-existent and divine, who was before him (John i.
15), and one not merely receiving the absolute fulness of the Spirit,
but DISPENSING THE SPIRIT. The Messiah, according to the Baptist, was to
baptize with the Spirit and with fire (Matt. iii. 11), which places Him
in a different category from the Old Testament judges and prophets. That
authority to give the Spirit was the culminating point of Christ's
exaltation. It has been alleged by Schmid that this prediction of the
Baptist was a thought unknown to the Old Testament prophets, and that it
wholly transcended their range of view. It might have been difficult for
any one to find this truth in the language of the prophets, apart from
the light reflected upon them by the New Testament statements. But we
may probably affirm that it was there, to the satisfaction of those who
could see it or should use aright the key when it should afterwards be
given to them, for the Messiah was to receive gifts for men (Ps. Ixviii.
10), and to be anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows (Ps.
xlv. \*T). The baptism with the Spirit and with fire, which John
contrasts with his own baptism, implies that the Spirit should be
dispensed by the hand of the Messiah, and that He who had this power
must be an accepted Mediator as well as a divine Person. But it also
intimates an abundant communication of the Spirit's extra ordinary and
sanctifying gifts.

We come next to THE SAYINGS OF JESUS on the doctrine of the Spirit, and
it is worthy of notice that on several points, and especially on the
inscrutable relations of the Trinity, we find, as was to be expected,
disclosures from His lips more definite and ample than are expressed by
any of His servants, whether prophets or apostles. In His last
discourses spoken in the midst of His disciples (John xiv.—xvi.), He set
forth for their comfort and for the Church's instruction the essential
as well as economical relations in which the Holy Spirit stood to Him,
and the mission of the Spirit for the guidance of apostles and the
application of redemption, in a manner more full and ample than we find
in any other part of Scripture. He shows (1) that the Father should send
the Holy Spirit IN His NAME (xiv. 2G), a statement which implies that
the Spirit, previously forfeited and withdrawn from mankind in conse
quence of sin, should, on the ground of His merits and inter cession as
the Mediator, be sent by the Father for all the purposes of His
redemption. He shows (2) that the Spirit should be dispensed or given by
His hand. This He repeatedly announced, and much more explicitly than
was ever done by the Baptist.

We find that there are two principal divisions of our Lord's sayings on
the subject of the Spirit,—those which describe the Spirit's work in
conversion, and those which describe the Spirit's work on the mind of
apostles and of the Church in general.

Those sayings which describe the Spirit's work in conversion, will be
most fitly adduced afterwards (Lect. IV.).

Christ also promised the Holy Spirit to His believing disciples as
rivers of living water: " If any man thirst, let him come to me, and
drink. He that bclievcth on me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water. But this spake He of the
Spirit, which they that believe on Him should receive: for the Holy
Ghost was not yet given; because Jesus was not yet glorified" (John vii.
3 7—39). We have to notice first Christ's saying, and then the apostolic
commen tary appended to it. While water is in certain passages the
element of cleansing, it is introduced here and elsewhere (Isa. Iv. 1)
as the element of quenching thirst. They who are said in a religious
sense to thirst have a painful feeling of want, and desire relief in the
only way in which they can attain it. Two things are included in the
invitation. They are desired TO COME, which simply means to believe, as
is evi dent from the alternated expression employed in another passage
(John vi. 35), implying a misery from which they escape, and a fountain,
that is, the Saviour, to which they are invited to repair; and they are
desired to DRINK, for in no case can the sense of thirst be removed by
merely looking at the fountain. The terms thus conjoined, COME and
DRINK, mean faith, but are no mere tautology. They are the incipient,
and the enlarged or continued exercise of the same grace of faith.

And it is promised that from the heart of this believing disciple there
should well up or flow out rivers of living water, which intimate
precisely the same thing as Christ said to the woman of Samaria (John
iv. 14). The meaning is not that the Spirit flows from one disciple to
another,—for none can so give the Spirit,—but that the Spirit as a
flowing river quenches the thirst and satisfies the desires, so that the
soul no longer thirsts for any other object. The promise is not to
apostles alone, for that ulterior promise following faith in Christ is
made definite: He tliat believcth on me. But this by no means
presupposes that the believing disciple has, by his own self-determining
power, produced this faith without the teaching of the Father (John vi.
45), the drawing of the Son (xii. 32), of the life-giving power of the
Spirit (vi. 63).

The terms of the apostolic commentary subjoined are very significant.
They show that Christ meant the Spirit, and that all the inward
satisfaction, rest, peace, joy, and assurance flowing into the soul and
quenching its thirst, are the result of the Spirit's operation. When
John says that Christ spoke of the Spirit which believers should
receive, he explains why Jesus used the future tense and not the past:
rivers of living water shall flow. But the apostle adds that " the
Spirit was not yet," because Christ's glorification had not yet arrived.
He does not mean that the Spirit did not yet exist,—for all Scripture
attests His eternal pre-existence,—nor that His regenerating efficacy
was still unknown,—for countless millions had been regenerated by His
power since the first promise in Eden,—but that these operations of the
Spirit had been but an anticipation of the atoning death of Christ
rather than a GIVING. The apostle speaks comparatively, not absolutely,
as is always done when the old and new economy are contrasted.

Christ's testimony to the Spirit contained special reference to the
Comforter (John xiv. 16-xvi. 7). As further allusion will be made to
these promises, it may here suffice to enumerate the passages and give
their scope. For wise reasons, the Lord reserved His special teaching on
the Holy Spirit to His last evening on the earth, that the donation of
the Spirit might be connected in the mind of the disciples with His
vicarious sacrifice, and that He might be expected as Christ's Deputy.
We are reminded of this antecedent and con sequent when He speaks of
sending the Spirit (John xv. 26), of giving the Spirit (vii. 39), of
pouring out the Spirit (Joel ii. 28), of kindling a fire on the earth
(Luke xii. 49). The culminating point of Christ's exaltation was to have
the authority or power of baptizing with the Holy Ghost, as foretold by
John the Baptist and announced by the Lord Himself (Acts i. 5). The
authority to give the Spirit was assigned to the Son as the reward of
His finished work. That no one might suppose that the Spirit's
dependence on the Father is removed, Christ says: " Whom I will send to
you from the Father" (John xv. 26). And to show that this was done at
Christ's intercession and request, He says: " I will pray the Father,
and He shall give you another Comforter" (John xiv. 16); that is, to
compensate them for their great loss in losing the visible presence of
their Lord.

To be convinced of the importance which Christ attached to the mission
of the Spirit, we have only to recall the terms in which He four times
refers to the Paraclete or Comforter. Whether we render the word TEACHER
with some, or HELPER with others, or ADVOCATE and PATRON with others, or
abide by the translation COMFORTER, with which we are most familiar, the
tenor of the promise implies.that He was to be sent at Christ's
intercession, and to act as His Deputy.

A brief summary of the different operations of the Comforter may be set
forth as follows. He was, after Christ's departure from the world, to
take the Saviour's place, and in all cases of official duty or emergency
to impart the necessary aid. He was to remind the apostles what Christ
had taught them; He was to give them clearer and more extensive
communications in reference to the doctrine of Jesus; He was to unfold
to them what they did not com prehend when the Lord was with them. They
were to be under the perpetual direction and superintendence of the
Spirit, and supported by Him in the proclamation of the gospel wherever
they should be sent,—promises which imparted to them the greatest
calmness, and gave rise to the most joyful state of mind. Such a close
union is repre sented as existing between the Son and the Spirit, that
it almost seems from the passages which describe the indwelling of the
Spirit as if they were identical. But that is only in appearance. For
Scripture represents Christ as sending the Spirit to glorify Him,—to supply His place,—to lead the disciples into
all truth, and to imbue the minds of the apostles with an immediate
revelation of the divine will.

The Lord Jesus, in the evening of the first resurrection day, first
began to GIVE THE HOLY SPIRIT to the apostles assembled in one place.
And to make the occasion sig nificant, He breathed on them, and said: "
Eeceive ye the Holy Ghost." It has often been affirmed by expositors
that this was but a pledge or promise accompanied with a sym bolic
action, and awaiting its accomplishment on the day of Pentecost. The
words, however, must be accepted as they stand, and in their full
significance. They intimate an actual donation of the Holy Ghost, not an
allusion to the gift con ferred fifty days afterwards. The atonement was
already a completed fact, and accepted by the Father; the ever lasting
righteousness was actually brought in ; every barrier to the
communication of the Spirit was now removed; and the Lord did not deal
in empty symbols or mere terms. He bestowed what the words imply when He
said: " Eeceive ye the Holy Ghost" (John xx. 22).

This interpretation enables us to dispose of tw T o misleading opinions
which have obtained greater currency than could have been supposed. (1)
It is held by not a few, such as Stier, Wardlaw, and others, that the
apostles acted with undue precipitance in filling up the vacant
apostleship, because the promised effusion of the Spirit was not
received. The doubts raised by Stier against the steps taken to supply
the place from which Judas by transgression fell carry more serious
consequences than the propounders of that inter pretation imagine. It is
of no avail to say, If the Spirit came in the room of Christ, it would
have been more natural for Him to nominate the new apostle. The answer
is, The Spirit was actually doing so through the Church. When it is
said, Is it not possible that the apostles, with all their intellectual
knowledge and childlike confidence, might err ? the answer is, That the
Lord, in breathing upon them and imparting the Spirit, intimated that
what they remitted or retained would be ratified in heaven; and as for
the comparison between Matthias and Paul, whom Stier refers to as alone
filling the vacant place, it is sufficient to say that Paul calls
himself " one born out of due time." The whole college of apostles, to
whom the Lord said : " Eeceive ye the Holy Ghost," cannot be supposed to
have erred in their interpretation of the psalm (Ps. cix. 8), or in the
further step of publicly filling up the vacant office.

​(2) Another error is the modern notion propounded by the Plymouth
Brethren, that believers are not to pray for the Holy Spirit, because He
was once for all given on the clay of Pentecost, and that the Christian
body may not pray for what is already possessed. That rash and
presumptuous position, by whomsoever it is held, is discredited by the
fact that the apostles who had received the Holy Ghost on the first
resurrection day continued with one accord in prayer and supplication
for the promise of the Father (Acts i. 14). They prayed for the Spirit
though they had received the Spirit. They waited for more of the Spirit
that they had in compliance with their Lord's command. This is the true
attitude of the Christian Church in every age. And the history of the
apostles shows that not once, but on many occasions, they were made
partakers of the baptism of the Spirit and fire.

### THE EFFUSION OF THE SPIRIT ON PENTECOST.

The importance of the Book of Acts as the historic narrative of the
public effusion of the Spirit cannot be over-estimated. It shows how the
first disciples received the ascension gifts, and went forth equipped
with them to found the Christian Church. We learn that the little
company, obedient to the Lord's command, tarried in Jerusalem, not
forming plans how they should appear in public, but wrestling in prayer
till they were endued with power from on high. At length all that was
comprehended in Christ's farewell discourses found its wonderful
accomplishment when the day of Pentecost was fully come.

The significance of the Pentecost may be noticed in connection with the
Passover, the one referring to the Redemption, the other to the New
Covenant, as in the history of Israel. Pentecost, the fiftieth day from
the Passover, and from the exodus out of Egypt, was the feast of
First-fruits, and also, according to Jewish belief, the day when the Law
was proclaimed from Sinai. Both facts have their proper import.
Piegarded as the feast of First-fruits, the Pentecost furnished the
first - fruits of the world's conversion at the outpouring of the
Spirit. Regarded as the commemoration day of the Sinai Covenant, which
made the Jews a kingdom of priests, it was a fitting occasion for the
removal of the old economy and the erection of the new, and to be the
espousals day of the Christian Church.

A new revelation from God to man must needs be inaugu rated with
supernatural signs and miracles. As the Sinaitic Covenant was set up in
a miraculous way, it is obvious that when the time arrived for its
abrogation the new economy that superseded it must be ushered in by
similar miracles. As God came down on the mount in a supernatural way,
so did He bear witness to the apostles by signs and wonders and divers
miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost (Heb. ii. 4); or, as some will have
it, the glory of the Lord, the Shechina or fiery pillar, again appeared.

The greatest event in all history, next to the incarnation and
atonement, was the mission of the Comforter; for it will continue, while
the world lasts, to diffuse among men the stream of the divine life. The
Pentecost was the great day of the Holy Ghost, the opening of the river
of the water of life.

As Goodwin Goodwin's Works, vol. vi. p. 8. D says: " He must have a
coming in state, in a solemn and visible manner, accompanied with
visible effects as well as Christ had, and whereof all the Jews should
be, and were witnesses." Not only so; there must be a Church which at
its commencement should give the clearest indica tions of its heavenly
origin. That was the great birthday of the Christian Church.

The Christian economy was inaugurated amid supernatural manifestations
which could not be questioned. When the reality came, the shadow passed
away. The Jewish economy gave place before that which was to comprehend
all nations. Now the New Covenant founded on better promises began (Jer.
xxxi. 31 ; Ezek. xxxvi. 25). The noise as of a rush ing mighty wind
reminding them of the strong wind in Ezekiel's vision that made the dry
bones live, the flame of fire probably reminding them of the Shechina,
and the cloven tongues like as of fire, significant of an inexplicable
and mira culous power of speaking in every language, constituted the
solemn and public consecration of Christ's ambassadors for the founding
of a Church which should fill the whole earth, and into which all
nations should flow. Thus the Pentecost was openly signalized as the day
of the mission of the Comforter.

The apostles had some experience of the nature of their calling from the
mission on which Christ had sent them while yet with them; but now they
came forth with a public testimony, not only to Christ's Messiahship,
but to the great salvation purchased by His death. The Holy Spirit, as
the promised Paraclete, took the place of Christ's corporeal presence.
They were led by the Spirit into all truth, and the tongues were a
conclusive proof that the persons to whom such gifts were imparted spoke
by divine inspiration, and that it was not so much they as the Spirit
that spoke the words.

The great effusion on the day of Pentecost did not mean a religious mood
of mind or a pious enthusiasm, but that THEY WERE FILLED with the
personal Holy Ghost. Though some have a difficulty in accepting the
literal meaning of these terms, because they seem to imply a local
limitation which, of course, cannot be applied to the omnipresent
Spirit, it may be proper to remark that they have no more difficulty
than that the Spirit made, preserves, and governs the soul of man. The
meaning is, that they received a rich measure of the Spirit to fill the
human faculties, and such communica tions, gifts, and operations as were
needed to prepare them for their work. They were filled according to
their capacity and mental conformation, but in such a way that there was
not only ample variety, but room for increase and enlargement of the
earthen vessel. Nor does the expression refer only to extraordinary
communications. The ordinary sanctifying gifts are not to be excluded.
One thing they all had to perform— to confess the truth; and courage was
supplied by the Spirit. The transforming power of the Spirit so filled
them that the timid became bold, the selfish self-denied, the arrogant
humble ; the ambitious aspirants after distinction ceased to seek great
things for themselves. They felt that all gifts were from the Lord and
for the Church's welfare; and jealousy and envy vanished.

The effusion of the Spirit made a great change on all the powers of the
apostles, whether we look at their heart or at their understanding. They
received a knowledge such as they never had before of the great work
which Jesus had finished for man's salvation, and betrayed no longer the
perverse idea that the Messiah's kingdom was to be of a worldly nature.
They perceived in His whole earthly obedience the grand ransom necessary
to procure a spiritual redemption. And they were in full accord with the
Lord's instructions on all the principal topics of religion.

But special reference must be made to those extraordinary gifts
conferred by the sovereign gift of Christ on the day of Pentecost, which
continued all through the apostolic age, and which were not only very
various, but wholly distinct from the ordinary sanctifying or
ministerial gifts which continue in the Church through all her history.
The supernatural or extraordinary gifts were temporary, and intended to
disappear when the Church should be founded and the inspired canon of
Scripture closed; for they were an external proof of an internal
inspiration.

In describing them we shall follow the enumeration given by Paul (1 Cor.
xii. 8-11). Of all the miraculous gifts the chief and highest was THE
GIFT OF PROPHECY, which was intended—whether we look at the Old
Testament or the New—to be more of an official than personal nature, for
revealing the divine counsels for the edification and comfort of the
Church. The gift of prophecy and the field it covered —whether we look
at it simply as prediction, or as the revelation of the divine will in
general—forms so vast a theme, that we can do no more than refer to it.
What manifold and various communications were made by the prophets
previous to the completion of the canon, how they revealed the present
and future counsels of God, and how they spoke as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost, are points known only to the Lord, who gave them their
commission and message.

Another supernatural gift was THE GIFT OF TONGUES, the power of speaking
in foreign languages which had never been acquired;—a great work of the
Holy Ghost, which gave a sort of visibility to the inward inspiration by
which their mind was guided and controlled. Peter unaided could only
speak his Galilean dialect, which easily betrayed him, as we see in
Pilate's judgment hall; but now he could, in company with his
colleagues, command without difficulty the attention of educated
hearers, who heard them speak in their own tongue the wonderful works of
God. Many, interpreting the narrative of Acts in the light of the
peculiar allusions to the gift of tongues referred to in the Epistles to
the Corinthians, put another construction on the phrase. They interpret
the expression in the latter case as a speaking in ecstasy. That is the
modern German speculation devised to escape the full admission of the
extraordinary miracle. But it is a mis interpretation, and a violence to
the terms used in all the passages. The gift was wholly miraculous. The
apostles at the moment of inspiration received the extraordinary
endowment which qualified them to utter new words, wholly unknown
before, and to express by means of them sentiments and doctrines which
arrested, convinced, and enlightened the mind of those whom the Holy
Ghost was leading to the Saviour. Whatever difficulties we in this age
may have in understand ing the mode by which the operation was
accomplished, there can be no doubt that amid a conflux of people from
remote lands, no more appropriate or powerful means could be employed to
extend the gospel than that use of foreign languages, intimating as it
did that the gospel, unlike the limitations of Judaism, was not for one
people, but for all people. It filled the hearers with amazement and
admiration. To speak a new language by the sudden influence of the
Spirit exceeded all the powers of nature, and afforded a sure testimony
to the presence and omnipotence of the Holy Ghost. But in the Church it
had comparatively little value; for tongues were for a sign not to them
that believed, but to them that believed not (1 Cor. xiv. 22). The
apostle, therefore, when he heard that this gift was coveted for the
mere purpose of ostentatious display, took occasion to reprove the
Corinthians for that perversion (1 Cor. xii. 20-32).

An allied gift was the INTERPRETATION OF TONGUES, differing from the
former only in this, that these interpreters, not having the gift of
tongues, were enabled by the same Spirit to under stand and explain the
languages which were used. They thus possessed in interpretation what
they wanted in utterance. In certain cases these related gifts were
conjoined (1 Cor. xiv. 5).

The WORD OF WISDOM, the first named among the gifts, must not be
reckoned an ordinary gift (1 Cor. xii. 8). With out accepting the
ingenious definitions which have been pro pounded, it may be affirmed
that as wisdom, in the ordinary acceptation of the term, is that mental
endowment by which one regulates his life and plans most surely to gain
the ultimate end; so wisdom, as an extraordinary gift, differed from the
former only in this, that it was bestowed on the gifted persons by the
immediate effusion of the Holy Spirit. But as the apostle calls it not
only wisdom, but THE WORD OF WISDOM, we must understand a singular
faculty of pointing out the way of wisdom, both by their counsels and
their life, to those who were of weaker judgment and capacity. And the
same thing holds true of those who are in the same verse repre sented as
endowed with the WORD OF KNOWLEDGE by the same Spirit. As the apostles,
from the nature of their office, could not long reside within the bounds
of any single city or congre gation, and as they deemed it enough to lay
the foundations of Christian doctrine as to repentance, faith, and the
like (Heb. vi. 1), an extraordinary gift of illumination was given to
certain members of the Church, in order that the new-born babes, as they
are termed by Peter, might grow and increase in knowledge.

Next to these the apostle enumerates THE GIFT OF FAITH. We need scarcely
remark that by that expression we are not to understand saving faith,
the like precious faith common to all believers, but the extraordinary
faith, or faith of miracles, relating to those displays of divine power
which tended to the glory of God. It may be considered also as a display
of confidence or world-overcoming faith in the presence of dangers
peculiar to themselves or to others. There seems also to have been a
certain counteracting or repelling power which in imminent perils from
demons, noxious animals, or the elements of nature, deprived them of the
power to injure (Mark xvi. 18 ; Acts xxviii. 5). Faith was often needed
to confront dangers with a confident mind.

Allusion is next made to GIFTS OF HEALING and working of MIRACLES by the
same Spirit (ver. 9). The apostle distributes his classification of the
extraordinary gifts in this way, because they were not all in the hand
of any one man, but divided according to the Spirit's sovereign
pleasure. Though the apostles seem to have possessed all the
supernatural gifts, it does not follow that this held true of other
disciples. As to the working of miracles by a power far transcending
man's energy or skill, we need not make a special enumeration of the
many operations of that nature. They are said to be by the same Spirit,
one and the same Spirit distributing these miraculous operations to each
man severally as he pleased. They were sometimes called ivonders
(repara), from the effect of those astonishing interventions, and signs
(o-\^eta), because they indicated an efficient cause which was alone
adequate to work such prodigies and to lead men to God their creator.

Another supernatural gift was the power of DISCERNING SPIRITS, which,
for wise reasons, was conferred on many in the primitive Church to
unmask Satan's devices (ver. 10). The adversary, incessantly active in
sowing tares, never failed to send the blighting influence of false
teachers, who ceased not to deceive others, and might themselves be
deceived. Great evils, as the Scriptures everywhere testify, resulted
from this to the Church. To obviate these perils, the Spirit im parted
to certain members of the Church the gift of discern ing spirits; in
consequence of which these gifted disciples, in a way far transcending
human wisdom, were enabled to warn the Church.

Such were the supernatural gifts of the Holy Ghost with which the
disciples were amply supplied and adorned. And as is clearly indicated
by Paul's exhortations to Timothy, they might be either stirred up and
increased, or neglected (1 Tim. iv. 14 ; 2 Tim. i. 6). They were not
possessed by all, but distributed among those who possessed them by a
sovereign disposal, and probably according to the mental conformation
which each one had received by nature. Nor were they invariably confined
to true disciples; for we find undoubted allusions to the fact that
these extraordinary gifts were some times wielded by temporary
disciples, such as Judas, to whom at last the Lord shall say: " I never
knew you" (Matt. vii. 23). The power of the Spirit is seen in that
agency that acted on the day of Pentecost. We can trace the action of
the Holy Spirit in uniting a company of disciples in prayer and
supplication, and in animating them to continue waiting for the promise
of the Father. And the action of the disciples in all times and
countries is analogous.

Not only so ; the instruments by whom the Spirit works are prepared for
service in an analogous way, that is, with the sole exception of the
supernatural and extraordinary accom paniments. They are Christians
first, then called to labour. This is brought under our notice in the
most impressive and instructive manner, when we consider how the first
disciples were prepared for service. Their gifts were there, so far as
these were natural endowments; but they knew them not themselves; and
they were required to wait for the Spirit in the attitude of humble
suppliants till they were endued with power from on high; a preparation
so necessary, that had they precipitately proceeded to work without that
power, they would have accomplished nothing. To evince the greatness of
the change to be wrought upon them, we have only to recall the ignorance
and darkness which covered their minds, notwithstanding the instructions
which they had received.

The Book of Acts narrates the operations of the Spirit. "When
persecution at length broke out, the disciples, pour ing out their
united prayers, were all filled with the Holy Ghost (iv. 31). The
terrible discipline displayed on Ananias and Sapphira for an act of
attempted deception, which pro ceeded on the supposition that they could
overreach the omniscient Spirit that dwelt in the apostles and spoke in
them, filled the whole community with awe, and vindicated the honour due
to the Holy Ghost. And we see the Church after a time of persecution
walking in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost
(ix. 31).

Without tracing the history of the Spirit's operations, let me
succinctly state the general scope of the Book of Acts. It sketches the
movements of the kingdom of God; it exhibits men full of the Holy Ghost
and wisdom (vi. 3, xi. 24); it narrates the appointment of the
labourers, and the disposal of their services. It shows, as Luther
happily remarks, that the Holy Spirit was given, not by the law, but by
the hearing of the gospel. We trace how men were summoned to serve God,
and were owned as well as guided and controlled in the prosecution of
their work. The sovereign Spirit, as a personal agent, directed the
Church at Antioch to send forth Barnabas and Saul, saying: " Separate to
me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereto I have called them." We see
the Spirit prompting Philip to join himself to the eunuch's chariot, and
directing Cornelius to send for Peter, as well as directing Peter to go
and receive the first Gentile into the Church. We see the Spirit
prompting at one time and hindering at another (Acts xvi. 6).

## THE TESTIMONY TO THE SPIRIT IN THE APOSTOLICAL EPISTLES.

The apostolic testimony to the Holy Spirit was given according to a
fivefold type—that of Paul, of Peter, of James, of Jude, and of John.
The allusions in the Epistles, and especially in the whole compass of
Paul's teaching, are so numerous that they must rather be put together
than ex pounded at length.

One preliminary remark may be made. The apostles take for granted, with
full consent, the general corruption of man's nature, and refer to the
Spirit as the originator and source of all the saving, sanctifying, and
comforting influences which Christians experience (Eph. iii. 16; Rom.
xv. 13). How the renewing of the Holy Ghost is harmonized with the
freedom of the will, they stopped not to inquire, as if these points
were no part of their concern. But the fact of men's responsibility
along with the proclamation of converting grace and the renewing of the
Spirit, is set forth with a solemnity and urgency to which the solution
of these questions, if it were possible to solve them, could add no
further weight.

### THE TESTIMONY OF THE APOSTLE PAUL.

In none of the apostles do we find so many allusions as is supplied in
the Epistles of Paul to the Spirit's work in the full extent of His
saving and sanctifying operations. Besides other reasons which might be
mentioned, this may be ascribed to the fact that Paul had not known
Christ after the flesh (2 Cor. v. 16), and received his revelations more
in the way of inward communication by the Spirit than by outward
intercourse with his Lord, though he also received the latter. And
accordingly, in the memorable passage where he says : "Now the Lord is
that Spirit" (2 Cor. iii. 17), the close con nection in which he places
Christ and the Spirit shows how fully he apprehended their joint
mission, and how emphati cally he intimates that Christ is never to be
conceived of apart from the Spirit, nor the Spirit conceived of apart
from Him.

To the impartial inquirer who only seeks the truth, the Apostle Paul
conveys, with sufficient evidence, a testimony to the divine dignity of
the Spirit, when we find him saying in the Book of Acts, that the Holy
Ghost spoke by the prophet Isaiah (Acts xxviii. 25); that the Spirit
testified from city to city, that bonds and imprisonment awaited him
(xx. 23); when he declares that the Holy Ghost sustained him in his
ministry (Eom. xv. 19); when he appeals to the Holy Ghost, and calls Him
to witness (Eom. ix. 1); when he uses the same expression, SENT FORTH
(efaTreo-raXei/), to describe the mission of the Spirit that he employed
to describe the mission of the Son (Gal. iv. 4-G). But we shall find, as
we proceed, other proofs even more express.

When we survey the names or titles of the Spirit in Paul's Epistles,
they are numerous. Thus He is called the Spirit of God (Rom. viii. 9),
the Spirit of His Sou (Gal. iv. 6), the Spirit of Christ (Rom. viii. 9),
the Spirit of Him that raised up Christ from the dead (Rom. viii. 11).
If we look at the economy in virtue of which the Spirit is sent, He is
said to be shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour (Tit.
iii. 6). If we survey His titles as derived from the benefits and
blessings which He confers, and of which He is the immediate author, He
is called the Spirit that dwelleth in us (Rom. viii. 11), the Spirit of
grace (Heb. x. 29), the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge
of the Lord Jesus (Eph. i. 17), the Spirit of adoption (Rom. viii. 15),
the Spirit of life (Rom. viii. 2), the Spirit of meekness (Gal. vi. 1),
the Spirit of power, and of love, and of a sound mind (2 Tim. i. 7).

The commencement of the Christian life, as contrasted with the previous
sinful life, is uniformly ascribed by the apostle to the Holy Ghost.
Thus he says: " No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost" (1 Cor. xii. 3); and again: " He saved us by the washing [laver]
of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost" (Tit. iii. 5). Whether
we refer this expression : the lavcr of regeneration, to baptism or not,
certainly the last term, the renewing of the Holy Ghost, must be
construed as referring to the active operation of the Spirit at the
commencement of the Christian life. As it is the shedding or pouring out
of the Spirit (e£e%eey) to which salvation is traced, this cannot be
referred to mere doctrine. The personal Spirit is mentioned as the
producing cause. If it is asked in what sense can men be said to be
saved by the renewing of the Holy Ghost, when the salvation is in
Christ, the answer is obvious. There is a series of truths of which no
link can be awanting. We are saved by the divine purpose, for God hath
chosen us to salvation; we are saved by the atonement as the meritorious
ground of all; we are saved by faith as the bond of union to Christ; we
are saved by grace as contrasted with works done; we are saved by the
truth as conveying God's testimony; and we are saved, as it is here
expressed, by the renewing of the Holy Ghost, as producing faith in the
heart. The special work of the Spirit in conversion is thus proved to be
as essentially necessary and indispensable as any other link in the
chain. The apostle further speaks of saving blessings which eye hath not
seen nor ear heard, revealed to us by the Spirit (1 Cor. ii. 10); and he
adds that we receive not the spirit of the \\vorld, but the Spirit which
is of God, that we may know the things that are freely given to us of
God (1 Cor. ii. 12). When the Spirit is called "the Spirit of faith,"
that is, the AUTHOR or producing cause of faith (2 Cor. iv. 13),
according to the uniform meaning of that formula, there can be no more
conclusive proof that the commence ment of the new life must be ascribed
to the Holy Spirit.

There are three Pauline Epistles which are very full and definite in the
elucidation of the doctrine of the Spirit,—viz. the Epistles to the
Corinthians, to the Galatians, and to the Romans. I shall first refer to
their testimony, but by no means in a minute or exhaustive way, in the
above-men tioned order.

One principal topic found in the EPISTLES TO CORINTH has reference to
the personality and work of the Holy Ghost. It was particularly
necessary to call the attention of the Corinthian Christians to the
personality and presence, the influence and operations, of the Spirit,
because they were counteracting his work by attaching undue importance
to human wisdom, and pluming themselves on the possession of various
supernatural gifts which they owed absolutely to the Spirit, but which
were given for a different purpose. They dishonoured the Spirit, partly
by self-complacency, emulation, and contentions partisanship; partly by
their readiness to think lightly of the old licentious tendencies and
feelings for which Corinth had only been too notorious, and which all
too plainly threatened to return.

By the Holy Spirit the apostle did not mean, as some have thought, a
mere title of God or of Christ. He meant and taught the personal Holy
Ghost, distinct from the Father and the Son, but partaker of the same
numerical divine nature. He referred to the Spirit sent forth on His
mission as the guide and teacher of the Christian Church, whose
fellowship as a divine person was invoked in the apostolic benediction
(2 Cor. xiii. 14), as the great gift of the Christian Church. He
reminded the Corinthians, who were so favoured with a supply of
supernatural endowments as to come behind in no gift, that they were the
temple of God and inhabited by the Spirit (1 Cor. iii. 16), and then
subjoins a warning against defiling it (ver. 17).

In the most conclusive way, but without formal proof, the apostle
introduces the PERSONALITY AND OMNISCIENCE of the Holy Ghost when he
says : " The Spirit searches all tilings, yea, the deep things of God"
(1 Cor. ii. 10). He is thus referred to as personally distinct from God;
for He searches the deep things of God ; and He who can fathom the
plans, the purposes, and deep things of God, must be distinct in person,
yet divine in essence. The same divine personality is brought out in
connection 'with the rich profusion of extra ordinary gifts with which
the Christian Church was endowed (1 Cor. xii. 4-6): " Xow there are
diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit: and there are differences of
administrations (or ministries), but the same Lord: and there are
diversities of operations, but it is the same God who worketh all in
all." The Spirit, the producer of the gifts, is thus distinguished from
the gifts. But He is also distinct from God, the author of the
operations, and from the Lord Jesus, the author of the ministries. The
import is to the same effect as that which the apostle elsewhere
expresses, when he speaks of one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus
Christ, and one Spirit who unites Christians in the closest bond of
union (1 Cor. viii. 6 ; Eph. iv. 4-6). A personal will is ascribed to
Him; He divides His gifts to every one severally as He will (ver. 11).
To the subject of spiritual or miraculous gifts, which occupies a most
important place in these Epistles, I need not refer, after the
elucidation already given, except to say that they illustrate the
peculiar economy of the Holy Spirit.

Other passages not less clearly teach the special action of the Spirit
in the whole application of redemption. To some of these we shall now
allude.

​(a) " Such were some of you: but ye are, washed, but ye, are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God" (1 Cor. vi. 11). The three verbs: WASHED,
SANCTIFIED, and JUSTIFIED, have such an affinity to each other that they
must all be put in one category, as referring to the absolution,
sacrificial acceptance, and judicial justification of the Corinthians,
compared with their former state as one of guilt, exclusion from God's
presence, and just condemnation. One and the same thing, says Calvin, is
expressed by different terms. How far these Christians corresponded
individually to their high calling we forbear to inquire. But what we
desire to place prominently before our mind is that these saving
blessings are referred, first, to the name or merits of Christ as the
procuring cause, and then to the Spirit of our God, who made the
Corinthians partakers of them by His own effectual application. Plainly
this operation of the Spirit is distinguished from the preaching of the
gospel The latter may be, and probably is, included in the phrase : the
name of the Lord Jesus, which certainly intimates His merits, and may
take in the further thought of the preaching of His merits. But
manifestly something more than moral suasion is intimated as to the
application of redemption. A power immeasurably greater—that is, the

Spirit of our God—is referred to as enlightening their mind and leading
them to embrace the great salvation, and to be assured that they were
washed, sanctified, and justified.

​(V) " The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God :
for they are foolishness to him : neither can he know them, because they
arc spiritually discerned" (1 Cor. ii. 14). Here the apostle, after
noticing the unsearchable glory of revelation, and tracing it up to the
Spirit of God, sets forth, in the subsequent part of the chapter, that
the spiritual discernment and saving reception of it are not less from
the Spirit of God than the revelation itself. As to the title NATURAL
MAN, it is not difficult to apprehend its meaning, if we are content to
interpret Scripture by Scripture, without being encum bered by the
language of philosophy. They who are so called are simply those having
the animal and rational elements of man without the Spirit (Jude 19).
The point of the expression, whether we suppose extreme depravity or not
(Jas. iii. 15), is the privation or absence of the Spirit; and where
this is, men do not receive the things of the Spirit,—that is, the
atonement and all the saving provisions of the gospel,—and they cannot
know them. I shall not efface the angles of this expression to make it
less emphatic, nor apologize for the expression being used ; for I am
only an interpreter; and with that my duty ends. The natural man is he
who is not occupied by the supernatural power of the Spirit. The phrase:
" to receive the things " of the Spirit of God, as applied to the word
of truth, is a common New Testament expression,—meaning that through
grace the word is not only viewed as true, but assented to as good (Acts
xvii. 11 ; 2 Cor. xi. 4 ; 1 Thess. i. 6). That word the natural man does
not receive. But when it is added: " neither can he know them,"
expositors and divines in general, of the modern type, transmute the
words into will not know them. Heumann and others adduce as
corroborative proof for this sense: " He could there do no mighty work
because of their unbelief" (Mark vi. 5, 6). But it is a mistaken
interpretation. The unbelief of Christ's townsmen at Nazareth was such
that they neither brought their dis eased and helpless friends to
receive His miracles, nor came themselves to hear His wisdom; thus
limiting or curtailing His opportunity of conferring benefits. Or if we
refer the words to the moral obstruction interposed by the unbelief
itself, and suppose that Jesus, from a regard to the declarative glory
of God, would not proceed to work miracles which were only to be met
with scorn and rejection, there is as little warrant for transmuting the
apostle's cannot knoio into will not know.

Why the natural man neither receives nor knows the things of the Spirit
of God is next subjoined. The way of salvation by the cross, described
as " the things of the Spirit of God," appears to him absurd ; for they
are foolishness to him. Though the propositions, as such, in which the
doctrines are expressed can be sufficiently apprehended by the natural
understanding, he receives them not, neither can he know them, without a
supernatural discernment, taste, or relish for them imparted by the
Spirit of God. The apostle makes no concealment of the malady, and draws
a broad distinction between one who has the Spirit and one who has not
the Spirit.

​(c) This leads me to notice some of those significant expressions
scattered over the Epistles where the Spirit receives express titles
from the work which He performs in the application of redemption,
especially this title : the Spirit of faith.

" We having the same Spirit of faith, according as it is written, I
believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore
speak" (2 Cor. iv. 13). The title SPIRIT OF FAITH intimates that the
Holy Ghost is the author of faith; for all men have not faith; that is,
it is not given to all, and does not belong to all (2 Thess. iii. 2).
The designation means that the producing cause of faith is the Holy
Spirit, who produces this effect by that invincible call and invitation
which accompanies, according to the good pleasure of His will, the
external proclamation of the gospel. The faith, therefore, of which He
is the author, is not effected by the hearer's own strength or by the
hearer's own effectual will (John vi. 44, 45 ; Eph. ii. 8 ; Phil. i.
29). But it is also a fruit of Christ's merits; for, apart from the
merits of the Saviour, no benefit can be conferred or can actually take
effect upon condemned men (Eph. i. 3). And though the mode in which the
Spirit produces faith cannot, in all its outlines, be fully comprehended
by believers in this life, of one thing there can be no doubt, He takes
out of the heart every hindrance and obstruction, pleasantly persuades
the judgment, and gently binds the will—nay, works in us both to will
and to do; or, to put it into the words of Jesus, " Every one,
therefore, that hath HEARD AND LEARNED of the Eather cometh unto me "
(John vi. 45). The word of truth and the regenerating work of the Spirit
are fully distinct, but always concurrent. The special operation of the
Spirit inclines the sinner, previously disinclined, to receive the
invitations of the gospel; for it is He alone, acting as the Spirit of
faith, that removes the enmity of the carnal mind to those doctrines of
the cross which, but for this, would seem to him unnecessary, or foolish
and offensive.

The apostle, in a profound passage in the Second Epistle to the
Corinthians, delineates the difference between the Jewish and Christian
economy as two different modes of adminis tering one and the same
covenant of grace. He contrasts the two in the great points of
antithesis between them. But what we have to consider here is their
relation to the gift of the Holy Spirit. One important topic bearing on
the difference of the two economies, is the supply of the Spirit in the
New Testament as contrasted with the Old. This is fully eluci dated by
the apostle (2 Cor. iii. 6-18). The New Covenant contrasted with that of
Sinai is called THE MINISTRATION OF THE SPIRIT (2 Cor. iii. 8), because
it was an essentially different economy. The New Covenant is called THE
SPIRIT, not the letter, because accompanied with the mission of the
Comforter and with the powerful operations of the Spirit in a manner
unknown before. Among its distinctive privileges, the supplies of the
Holy Spirit, which were of old promised by the prophets, are conferred
in a wholly new way, and with a copiousness not conferred before.

The antithesis between the Old and New Covenant is expressed in the
striking proposition, which is not without its difficulty : " the letter
killeth, but the Spirit giveth life " (ver. 6). This may be taken as a
general proposition ; and when so taken, it will be akin to the words :
" It is the Spirit that quickeneth ; the flesh profiteth nothing " (John
vi. 6 3). If, on the other hand, it refers to the difference of the
economies, which seems clearly to be the design of the apostle, the
meaning must be, that the former left men without the quickening Spirit;
or that the Spirit of life was not dispensed by that economy. When it is
said, with special reference to the New Covenant: " the Spirit giveth
life," the import is that the Spirit of life is now communicated in full
and abundant measure; that is, that Christ's words are spirit and life
(John vi. G3), as compared with that shadowy dispensation which has
passed away.

A brief explanation will serve to remove the difficulty which expositors
have found in the passage. Some have thought that the Sinaitic Covenant
was simply a covenant of works, wholly different in character from the
covenant of grace. That supposition cannot be accepted, for the law is
not against the promise of God (Gal. iii. 17). The apostle very often
speaks of a matter in a certain respect; that is, not absolutely, but in
a certain respect (secundum quid), and the statement here made must be
so understood. The Sinaitic Covenant, so far as founded on the law of
rites and apart from the covenant of grace, which involved the promise
of the Holy Spirit, was A KILLING LETTER, not only diverse from the New
Covenant, but leaving men in a state of bondage and death, and imparting
no relief.

A twofold view may be taken of the Sinaitic Covenant. It may be taken
more largely or more strictly, —a distinction to be applied as a key to
solve many difficulties in the Pauline Epistles. Taken more largely, the
Sinaitic Covenant, or the Old Testament type of religion, contains the
patriarchal gospel, or the Abrahamic Covenant, based upon Abraham's
seed, in whom all the families of the earth were to be blessed, and thus
as comprehending the promise. Taken more strictly, the Sinai Covenant—a
subsequent dispensation of which the patriarchs knew nothing—was a
national transaction between God and Israel, and conditional in its
character. The im mutable moral law, which existed before its
promulgation and exists since its abrogation, was its core. The nation
was specially bound to the law of a carnal commandment, to a shadowy
priesthood, to innumerable rites and ceremonies, which were but the
letter, without any supply of the Spirit, and which were enforced with
strictness and severity. The whole design looked to the end of the
shadow in the atoning work of Messiah. Strictly taken, the Sinai
Covenant is letter and shadow, — national, transitory, conditional, and
burdensome in the whole character of its arrangements. Such was the
distinction between the two. But it is necessary to add that it
presupposes the Abrahamic Covenant, because God could make no covenant
with sinful man but in a relation of grace. He could not have made a
covenant at Sinai unless with a certain respect to grace, and having the
covenant of grace as its basis and support.

When it is called " a killing letter" and contrasted with the Spirit
which giveth life, the meaning is, that the Sinai Cove nant, strictly
taken, or used as the mere letter, did not give the Spirit of life. But
the apostle's \\vords do no 4 , imply that there was no Holy Ghost
operating on the saints of the Old Economy, or that there were not
millions of saved men under it trained to eminent holiness and wisdom.
There were countless numbers of regenerate men in the Old Economy
distinguished for a faith and wisdom, a holiness, self-denial, courage
and zeal, redounding to the declarative glory of God, such as far
surpasses all modern examples. But it must be noted that none of them
received the regenerating grace and the Spirit of life which they
possessed from the Mosaic law, or from the letter sundered from the
promise. All who had the Spirit of life received it by faith upon the
promise of a Saviour, and not from the Sinai Covenant. Eor under all
economies, salvation and the supply of the Spirit were by faith. The
measure of the Spirit, under the Old Testament, was comparatively
limited, like the first-fruits; and it was given by anticipation. In
comparison with the numbers com posing the Old Testament Church, only a
few were made partakers of the gift of the Spirit, while the vast
multitude had no eye to see nor ear to understand. On these grounds the
apostle calls the one economy the letter, and the other the Spirit.

In the Second Epistle to the CORINTHIANS, the apostle gives expression
to Christian experience in many particulars. The Spirit is adduced as a
pledge of salvation, and as giving an assurance of the participation of
God's love.

" Now He who establisheth us with you in Christ, and hath anointed us,
is God; who hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in
our hearts" (2 Cor. i. 21). That the efficacy of the Spirit is something
distinct from the preaching of the gospel, is clearly indicated in this
passage and in similar passages. The theory which identifies them finds
no coun tenance from these words; for there is an influence of the
Spirit on the heart of Christians, apart from the mere moral influence
of the word. The apostle, as the founder of the Corinthian Church,
speaks of being united with them in Christ, and of their being anointed
as a royal priesthood to make a common confession of Christianity. The
previous allusion to Christ as the Anointed One, seems to have led him
to describe THEM AS ANOINTED, which implies something more than mere
instruction through the word: It is unction for priestly service. He
adds, " who hath also sealed us," implying that they bore A SEAL or
impress from God, by which they not only were themselves assured, but
marked as belonging to God, who put a seal on them, which made them
known to others as His property. ]S T ot only so: God gave them the
earnest of the Spirit in their hearts. The term EARNEST (dppaftwv},
three times applied in the Xew Testament to the Holy Spirit, denotes a
certain sum in hand, a pledge of something further to be conferred, and
it was a security that they should not be put to shame. Paul speaks of
the Holy Spirit as producing these effects on the heart. For we cannot
expound the term EARNEST merely of the miraculous gifts of the Spirit,
which accompanied the first proclamation of the gospel as a proof of its
divine origin.

" Ye arc declared to be the epistle of Christ ministered by us, written
not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God " (2 Cor. iii. 3).
The Church of Corinth, a large flourishing community, was an emphatic
proof of Paul's apostleship, and of the success with which his zealous
efforts had been crowned in spreading the gospel. They were an epistle,
written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God,—where w r e
cannot fail to notice two persons, the living God and His Spirit, by
whom he acted at first, and continued to act, on the heart of these
Corinthians. By the Spirit we cannot there understand revelation, or the
divine origin of Christianity ; for comments of that nature only betray
an adverse bias, and are not worthy of serious refutation. Plainly, the
apostle distin guishes his ministry from the writing of the Spirit. He
refers to the efficacious effect of his ministry, and ascribes it to the
Holy Spirit. Nor does he appeal to miraculous gifts, but to the Spirit's
influence in effecting the spiritual renovation of the heart, as
contrasted with the Old Covenant, which was written on tables of stone.

" He that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God, who hath also
given us the earnest of the Spirit" (2 Cor. v. 5). The Spirit is again
called " the earnest," and the longing for the heavenly glory is
connected with His operation.

In the Epistle to the GALATIANS, the apostle's doctrine on the entire
economy of the Spirit is peculiarly full. This was due to circumstances
which made it necessary.

The gospel, as preached by Paul among the Galatians, had found a ready
acceptance, and been accompanied with the miraculous ministration of the
Spirit, and with the most arresting displays of power (Gal. iii. 5). The
Galatians, it is said, had begun in the Spirit (iii. 3). Before much
time elapsed, the recently-formed churches were subjected to the test of
false teachers. Emissaries from the Pharisaic party demanded that
Christians from the ranks of the Gentiles should observe the Jewish
rites as necessary to justification before God. In a word, these
ceremonies, along with the doctrine of Christ, were to be retained as
essentially necessary. The apostle, in writing this Epistle, assails
that fundamental error with all his energy, refuting it from central
truth and from their own experience in the past.

He shows that they had not received the Spirit by the works of the law,
but by the message or preaching (a/corf) of faith (iii. 3). This is the
Holy Spirit, with all His gifts, as pro mised by the prophets to the
Church; for the ordinary saving gifts of regeneration and holiness, as
well as the supernatiiral gifts, are here included. These were not
received by the per formance of any actions of the ceremonial or moral
law, which could only have filled their mind with a knowledge of sin and
a fear of wrath. On the contrary, they had received the Spirit by the
message of faith.

We are next taught that the promised Spirit was procured by nothing less
than the vicarious death of Christ. This argu ment completely exploded
the legalism of the false teachers. The donation of the Spirit is thus
connected with the atone ment : " Christ hath redeemed us from the curse
of the law, being made a curse for us, that (iva) the blessing of
Abraham might come upon the Gentiles, that we might receive the promise
of the Siririt through faith" (iii. 14). The meaning of these words is :
the death of Christ was the meritorious cause or purchase of this great
gift—the promised Spirit. The final particle (iva) leans on the words
which describe the sacrifice of Christ. It is the connection of merit
and reward, of cause and consequence.

To show, moreover, that works of law are wholly excluded, and that the
great donation of the Holy Spirit, which was given to the Galatians at
the founding of the Church among them, was not to be traced to doing on
the part of man, but to simple reliance on the merits of Christ, the
apostle adds: " That we might receive the promise of the Spirit (or the
promised Spirit) through faith." The Spirit of the Son— in other words,
the Spirit of adoption—is further described by Paul as given only to
those who are sons by faith, and par takers of the atonement (iv. 6).
The proof is thus complete, that the Holy Spirit was not received by the
works of the law.

The last part of the Epistle displays the work of the Spirit in another
light. The former allusions were more to the Christian's privileges. The
two closing chapters set forth the graces of the Holy Spirit and the
Christian's fruitfulness. The same apostle who was solicitous in the
first part to assert the liberty of the Christian, and who bids us stand
fast in it, is not less solicitous to set forth in the second part the
Spirit's renewing and sanctifying influence. Thus, with respect to
Christian HOPE or patience, he puts it in causal connection with the
Spirit's operation in these terms: we through the Spirit wait for the
hope of righteousness by faith (v. 5). The distinction between flesh and
spirit, nature and grace, is next described in such a way as proves the
momentous importance of drawing a strict line between the two, of
apprehending it in the Christian's consciousness, and following it out
in the Christian's walk : " I say then, walk in (by) the Spirit, and ye
shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh " (v. 16, 17). He adduces it as a
proof of their liberty from the curse of the law, that the Christian is
led by the Spirit (v. 18.) After enumerating the works of the flesh, he
specifies as the fruit of the Spirit —"love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith fulness, meekness, temperance " (v. 22). He
calls these the fruit of the Spirit, as if they grew on a living,
fruitful tree; and he adds that against such persons—for the allusion is
to persons (Kara rwv TOIOVTWV} —there is no law (v. 23). From living by
the Spirit he argues the duty of walking by the Spirit (v. 25), and he
concludes these duties by referring to the duty of sowing to the Spirit
(vi. 8).

The Epistle to the ROMANS gives an outline of the doctrine of the Holy
Spirit in an experimental, not in a controversial way. This Epistle was
meant not so much to smooth differ ences or unite parties, as to confirm
the Church in true doctrine. On the subject which engages our attention,
the Epistle to the Romans contains very marked allusions which
distinguish the Holy Spirit's work from the operation of Providence on
the one hand, and from the objective presenta tion of truth on the
other. The Epistle shows another influence distinct from the word though
connected with it, in producing faith, and in leading Christians in whom
faith already exists. To this I refer the more readily, because the
celebrated Griesbach in two University-programmes laboured to prove that
the term SPIRIT in the eighth chapter means nothing more than Christian
character and disposition; and because many others, paralysed by these
objections, have been in the habit of affirming that there are few
passages where the sense of the word " Spirit" is more difficult. We
shall find that it does not occur in more senses than one, and that it
neither means influence nor Christian disposition, but the Holy Spirit.

This appears beyond dispute when it is said that the Gentiles were made
obedient by word and deed, through mighty signs and wonders, by the
power of the Spirit of God (Kom. xv. 19). That the miracles wrought by
Paul are there attributed to the Spirit, is beyond dispute. The agent
and the power which the agent puts forth are both mentioned in alluding
to these miracles. The conversion of the Gentiles, in like manner, or
the offering np of the converted Gentiles as an acceptable sacrifice, is
ascribed to the Holy Ghost (xv. 16).

On the economy of the Spirit, in connection with Christ's Sonship, there
is a noteworthy passage, though on almost all sides it is incorrectly
referred to the divine nature of our Lord: " Concerning His Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, who was made of the seed of David according to the
flesh; and declared to be the Son of God with power, accordiiu/ to the
Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead " (i. 3, 4).
Plainly the apostle does not allude to the two natures of our Lord as
commentators expound it, but to THE TWO STATES of humiliation and
exaltation. And the expression: " Spirit of holiness," does not refer to
the divine nature, but to the dis pensation of the Spirit after His
resurrection, which supplied the most conclusive evidence of our Lord's
divine Sonship. The effusion of the Spirit on the apostles and on the
Church terminated the controversy whether He was the Son of God. The
communication of the Holy Spirit—a gift competent to no created
being—proved Him to be the Messiah and the Son of God, according to His
own claim (John v. 19).

" The love of God is shed abroad upon our hearts by the Holy Ghost
ivhich is given to us" (Eom. v. 5). These words intimate that the Holy
Ghost as a divine agent does a certain work; that He is given according
to a divine economy; and that through His aid the redeeming love in
God's heart is shed abroad in our hearts, tasted and enjoyed, not only
in the first stages of the Christian's experience, but ever afterwards.
Plainly this is distinct from miraculous gifts and from the proclamation
of the gospel. It intimates that the Holy Ghost sheds abroad God's
boundless, free, unchanging love in our hearts, and that He is given to
believers as a perpetually indwelling guest,—reminding the Christian of
reconciliation, supplying the constant experience of the divine love,
and assuring him of its perpetuity as a gift never to be forfeited.

It is in the eighth chapter, however, that we find the doctrine of the
Holy Spirit most fully developed, from different points of view. The
apostle's object is to prove the certainty of the believer's salvation
from the fact that they are led by the Spirit of God. He demonstrates
that they enjoy the effectual operation of the Spirit as a blessing
which has its ground in the surety-obedience of Christ its procuring
cause (2-4). The argument is, that they who are occupied by the Spirit
and who walk after the Spirit are exempt from condemnation. In other
words, he argues that they who are free from the service of sin through
the Spirit of life are by that fact proved also to be free from
condemnation. The apostle had set in a clear light the connection
between justification and sanctification on the ground of merit or
purchase (vi. 1-13). He here shows that the spiritual life is secured by
the effectual operation of the Holy Spirit. The entire section exhibits
the Christian in the highest stages of the divine life, and supplies a
rule by which the Christian teacher is to regulate his thinking and
phraseology.

The apostle begins his discussion on the Spirit with these memorable
words: "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free
from the law of sin and death" (Eom. viii. 2). The two laws — that of
sin and death, already referred to in the seventh chapter (vii. 23), and
a counterpart law of life in Christ—are again put in direct
antithesis—that is, into the contrast of flesh and spirit, which \\ve
find pervading the whole Pauline theology. But why, it may be asked, is
the Spirit called the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus ? The
entire expression is equivalent to this : the spirit of life residing in
Christ and dispensed by Christ is a law of irresistible power
counteracting the law of sin and death. It is the law written on the
heart, by which the regenerate man is step by step enabled to resist sin
and follow holiness. It is the law of the life-giving Spirit in the
fellowship of Christ Jesus.

The apostle next adverts to several operations of the Spirit which
deserve the most attentive consideration singly and collectively.

​1. The first thing to be noticed is the sequence of operations as
described in the Christian's experience. There are three distinct
expressions, which are introduced in this order: (1) They walk after the
Spirit (viii. 4); (2) they are spiritually-minded (viii. 6); (3) they
are in the Spirit (viii. 9). In the order of sequence the last named,
however, comes first, as follows:—They are in the Siririt by the act of
regenerating grace; they are spiritually-minded —that is, they mind the
things of the Spirit when they are inwardly disposed, moved, and
animated according to the mind of the Spirit; they walk after the
Spirit, which refers more to their outward practical life. The sequence
is such as proves that it is not sufficient to perform good works which
challenge the attention of spectators, unless there be the inner change
of character and disposition, which naturally weans the heart from the
objects to which the natural bias disposes it.

​2. The second thing mentioned in the passage is, that the Spirit DWELLS
in the Christian (viii. 9). A running contrast between the flesh and
Spirit is carried out through the entire section. And the indwelling of
the Spirit of Christ is adduced as a conclusive proof that we are not in
the flesh, but in the Spirit; for Christ, the second Adam, received the
Spirit as a reward for the performance of His work of suretyship, that
He might impart the Spirit to all believers. When the apostle subjoins :
" if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of His " (ver. 9),
it shows that the participation of the Holy Spirit is not universal; and
that only they who are given to Christ and redeemed by Him, enjoy the
inhabitation of the Spirit in the Biblical acceptation of the term. In
them He dwells, as in His habitation or abode, for ever. It is this
inhabitation which imparts the spiritual mind, the mark by which the
true disciple is distinguished; for Christ and His people are anointed
with the same Spirit.

​3. The Spirit is LIFE because of righteousness (v. 10). Though the body
is dead because of sin, this death is not re garded as a punishment or
anything properly penal, but only as a consequence, still permitted to
run its course, after Christ has fully satisfied divine justice. But the
Spirit is life on the ground of Christ's righteousness. As He gave life
to all creatures at first, so does He give life immortal, incorruptible,
and unfading to the new creature—that is, to all the redeemed of the
Lord.

​4. They who have the Spirit mortify the deeds of the body (ver. 13).
They are debtors, not to the flesh, but to the Spirit. The flesh, or the
deeds of the body, they mortify, because they are the cause of death.
They cannot so kill it that it shall stir no more; but they, by the
Spirit, weaken it, and lop off its branches one by one.

​5. They are led by the Spirit of God, and are thus evinced to be the
children of God (ver. 14). The expression: "led by the Spirit," refers
to an inward prompting, impulse, and inclination, which so rules and
guides them that they cannot omit duty or neglect privilege. It implies
the helplessness of a child which cannot stand alone, but needs a strong
sup porting hand; for it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps
(Jer. x. 23). The saints of God, to whom the expres sion applies, are
not only ignorant of the way, but when they know it, their liability to
stumble too readily betrays itself, and their natural reluctance must
constantly be overcome. This LEADING is attributed to the Spirit of God,
the master of the inclinations, of the will and the affections by which
men are moved and animated, so that in due time they desire to do
nothing but what they are prompted to undertake by the illumination from
on high.

They are on this ground evinced to be the CHILDREN OF GOD ; and this
leads the apostle to describe the Holy Spirit as the author of adoption,
and as prompting the believer to realize the privileges connected with
the filial relationship. Philippi seems to me mistaken l in denying that
the phrase SPIRIT OF ADOPTION can mean the Spirit who effects the
Son-ship or transplants us into the relationship of sons. The analogy of
all the phrases of this description—such as the Spirit of love, the
Spirit of wisdom, the Spirit of power, the Spirit of revelation, and the
like — implies that He is the producing cause of the term following in
the genitive. This is no exception to the uniform usage. The same Spirit
pro duces the bondage to fear, and effects the adoption. On this great
central blessing put in our possession by the Spirit, I shall not now
enlarge, as it afterwards engages our attention in the dogmatic part of
this treatise.

The other effects of the Spirit mentioned in this chapter are these:
Christians have the first-fruits of the Spirit, and the Spirit helps
them in prayer.

​6. With regard to the first-fruits, the apostle says: "We ourselves
also who have the first-fruits of the Spirit" (ver. 23). Speaking of the
groaning universe waiting for deliver ance, he adds, that Christians
also who have the first-fruits of the Spirit groan. Some, with Grotius,
incorrectly limit these terms to the apostles. James, indeed, speaks of
the early Christians as the first-fruits (Jas. i. 18). But the Apostle

1 He snys, incorrectly: "Das Tv\^a vietiflaf kann nun nicht sein cler
Geist \\velcher die Kindscliaft wirkt" (Kom. viii. 15).

Paul is not speaking OF PERSONS, but OF GIFTS ; and there is only one
tolerable interpretation—viz. that which refers the first-fruits to the
commencement of the communications of the Spirit which are enjoyed in
this life.

​7. The other benefit is the Spirit's help in prayer (ver. 26). When
Christians know not what to ask, the Spirit helps their infirmities,
interceding IN THEM with unutterable groanings, while Christ intercedes
FOR THEM.

The only other passage which I shall adduce from this Epistle is the
prayer of Paul, that the Roman Christians might be filled with faith and
hope through the power of the Holy Ghost. He ascribes both the origin
and growth of these graces to the Holy Spirit (xv. 13).

The Epistle to the EPHESIANS, amid the deep truths opened up to a
congregation which was specially prepared to take them in, interweaves
the doctrine of the Spirit in a way which makes the train of the
argument in the highest degree practical.

The economy in virtue of which the Holy Spirit is dis pensed is thus
exhibited in the prayer for the congregation: " Making mention of you in
my prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory,
may grant unto you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge
of Him " (Eph. i. 17). He asks the Spirit on their behalf from the God
of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, the dis penser of the
Spirit, on the ground of Christ's merits as the procuring cause. The
import of the words: " The Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of the Lord Jesus," comprehends a full discovery of what was
planned and effected by God in the work of man's redemption. We have
here a numerous and varied class of blessings of which the Holy Ghost is
the producing cause. It is what philologists call the genitive of the
author.

" The Spirit of revelation in the knowledge of Christ" is a memorable
title of the Spirit from the work which He performs upon the human mind
(Eph. i. 17), in illuminating the eyes of the heart, as it is here
expressed, to behold a beauty in divine things of which it had
previously no conception. Notwithstanding the lingering remains of the
image of God in reason, conscience, and the longing after immortality,
there was not before this one spark from which the illumina tion of the
understanding could arise—only darkness and enmity (1 Cor. ii. 14; Rom.
viii. 7). The Spirit enlightens the understanding, which was previously
alienated from the life of God (Eph. iv. 18), to perceive the truth of
the gospel, as worthy of God and divinely adapted to human wants, and
especially the truth relating to Christ's atonement. Not that the
natural man could not with sufficient correctness grasp the thought in a
speculative way; but it was much in the same way in which a blind-born
man thinks or speaks of colours. "When the eyes of the heart are opened,
a glory is beheld in Christ's person and work unknown before; and a
light is conveyed to the mind which produces a transforming change on
all its powers.

Another passage in this Epistle not less emphatic is: " Through Him
(Christ) we loth have access by [in] one Spirit unto the Father" (Eph.
ii. 17). The apostle, speaking in the person of the Church composed of
Jews and Gentiles, says : " We BOTH have access, or introduction, to the
Father," and he mentions the mediator through whose merits that intro
duction is effected. He adds that it is IN ONE SPIRIT, whom w 7 e
possess as a Spirit of faith and love, infusing confidence on the ground
of Christ's priesthood. The one Spirit can only mean the one Holy Ghost,
which men of all nationali ties, without distinction, now enjoy; and the
force of the preposition: " IN one Spirit," is by no means to be
stripped of its significance, as has too often been done by commen
tators. The intention of the apostle was to bring out with precision the
difference of the relation in which Christ and the Spirit stand to the
Church,—the one as the meritorious

Surety, the other as the life-giving agent who puts us in possession of
the whole redemption.

In the use of a favourite expression, the apostle again calls the Spirit
a SEAL and EAKNEST. " After that ye believed ye were sealed with that
Holy Spirit of promise, who is the earnest of our inheritance " (i. 13).
To the same effect the apostle warns them not to grieve the Holy Spirit
by whom they were sealed (iv. 30). As to the order in which this sealing
stands, it conies after believing—that is, next after faith; and as to
the SEAL itself, too much ingenuity has often been used in elucidating
it. Without appealing to classical or Hebrew examples, it may suffice to
say that the impress of a seal implies a relation to the owner of the
seal, and is a sure token of belonging to him. From the three passages
where the term SEAL is expressly used, we gather that believers are
God's inviolable property, and known to be so by the Spirit dwelling in
them. The sealing implies that the image engraven on the seal is
impressed on the thing, or on the person sealed. In this case it is the
image of God im pressed on the heart by the enlightening, regenerating,
and sanctifying power of the Holy Spirit. By that seal believers are
declared to be the inviolable property of God (2 Tim. ii. 19); and they
are sealed to the day of redemption as some thing which is to be
inviolably secure (Eph. iv. 30). Not only so: there is a subjective
assurance which they acquire as to their gracious state and final glory.
The Spirit is also called an EARNEST (appaftwv) as well as a seal—that
is, a foretaste which is equivalent to the first-fruits of the Spirit,
elsewhere mentioned (Eph. iv. 14).

The apostle prays in a second memorable prayer for the Ephesians, that
they might be strengthened with might BY THE SPIRIT in the inner man,
that Christ might dwell in their hearts by faith (iii. 16). The Spirit
strengthens the believer by giving him a share in all the benefits and
blessings which Christ procured, as well as by confirming faith and
love, that the conscious indwelling of Christ may be realized; the in
dwelling of Christ answering to the confirmation of the Spirit. When the
apostle refers to the Church, he calls it an habitation of God in the
Spirit (Eph. ii. 22), and, by another figure, one body and one Spirit
(iv. 4). Nor does he stop at doctrine: while enforcing Christian duty,
he introduces the Holy Spirit in many connections. When he warns the
Ephesians against indulging angry passions and unworthy practices, he
says: " Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God," implying that such things on
the part of Christians grieve the Spirit 1 (iv. 30). When he exhorts
them to prayer, he bids them pray with all prayer and supplication in
the Spirit (vi. 18). When he warns them against intemperance, he
immediately subjoins an exhortation, calculated in its exercise to
exclude all tendency to the habit of intemperance by the spiritual joy
and satisfaction which take possession of the Christian: but be filled
ivitli the Spirit (v. 18); for the enjoy ment of that fulness of the
Spirit satisfies the soul, and leaves it no longer a prey to
intemperance or any such desires. But in what sense can the Christian be
EXHORTED to be filled with the Spirit, when we call to mind that it is
God alone by whom the Spirit is bestowed ? The answer is easy. It is of
God's gracious gift when the Spirit replenishes any soul. But it is also
a subject of exhortation. This is of the same nature with the
exhortations in the Epistle to the Galatians: walk in the Spirit (Gal.
v. 16, 25). The Father, in the cove nant, provided for the restoration
of the Spirit; the Son pro cured the Spirit by His satisfaction, and
lives to confer the gift; and we have only to receive and make room for
Him daily, neither resisting nor grieving Him away from the heart.

1 See the beautiful remarks of Rev. Robert Hall on the work of the
Spirit. "Vindictive passions," says he, "surround the soul with a sort
of turbulent atmosphere, than which nothing can be conceived more
opposite to that calm and holy light in which the blessed Spirit loves
to dwell" (vol. i. p. 410).

In the Epistle to the PHILIPPIANS several allusions to the Holy Spirit
are found, having reference partly to Paul's own condition and partly to
theirs. Errorists had not as yet troubled the Church from within, but
marked intimations and warnings are given respecting them to this
congregation, of whom the apostle always speaks with the deepest
affection.

After noticing the mixed motives of some who preached the gospel of
contention, not sincerely, the apostle adds: " I know that this shall
turn to my salvation through your prayer, and THE SUPPLY OF THE SPIRIT
of Jesus Christ" (Phil. i. 19). According to his own declaration
elsewhere, he was persuaded that all this would work together for good.
Their prayer and the supply of the Spirit of Christ are not put together
as co-ordinate. He means that all would redound to the victory of
Christ's cause, and to his own highest advantage, through the supply
(eV\^op\^/a) of the Spirit, while their prayer would be no unimportant
sub ordinate link in the chain. As to the words here used, the Holy
Spirit is called " the Spirit of Jesus Christ," not only because He is
from the Son as well as from the Father, according to the eternal
procession from both, but because the gift of the Spirit is derived from
Christ's merits. He procured by his obedience and satisfaction not only
the restoration of the divine favour, but the gift of the Holy Ghost,
who is thus rightly called the Spirit of Christ. The more copious
effusion of the Spirit is referred to the action of Christ no less than
to the action of the Father, who gave to the Son the power of sending
the Spirit, and of conferring all the benefits which were acquired by
His death (Zech. xii. 10).

The apostle expresses his confidence that the cause of the gospel would
be promoted by the aid of the Spirit of Christ, who would not only cause
the truth to triumph over false hood, but nerve him with necessary
courage to seal, if need be, his testimony with his blood. But that no
one might imagine that these results would be given to the indolent or
lukewarm, the apostle links the supply (eVry;0/9777/a) of the Spirit
with the prayers of believing men in the Church, to which he was
writing; for he constantly asked prayer as a means of spreading
Christian truth. Such is the weakness of human efforts, that we
accomplish nothing unless the Holy Ghost is the guide and ruler of all
our actions, and unless He is invocated, as it is here intimated that he
should be invocated, by the Church, as alone able to bring help.

To ward off the danger of disunion and mutual alienation, of which there
was no little fear (iv. 2), the apostle bids them stand fast in ONE
SPIRIT (i. 27); and at the commencement of the second chapter, he bases
one of his arguments for unity, love, and concord on the fact that they
had received the communication (fellowship) of the Spirit; for this com
munication evinces itself in unity and love.

Another passage referring to the worship of God in the Spirit is: " We
are the circumcision who WORSHIP GOD IN THE SPIRIT, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no con fidence in the flesh" (iii. 3); the
contrast being between worship in the Spirit and ritualistic tendencies.
The apostle depreciates circumcision; he speaks of it as nothing better
now than concision, and by contrast he says we are the cir cumcision,
the spiritual Church. The next clause is: who worship God in the Spirit,
as the result of regeneration, and as deduced from it. It is not to be
resolved into the vague idea of spiritual worship, as commentators too
commonly put it, but viewed as worship in the power of the Spirit; the
term Sjnrit being plainly the echo of the promise: " I will pour out my
Spirit on all ilesh." The reference is not so much to
sanctification—though that, too, is comprehended—as to the adoption of
sons; nor does the apostle stop there, for another equally important
point is, that this worship of God in the Spirit discovers itself in the
exercise-of rejoicing in Christ Jesus—that is, as not leading away from
Christ, but to Christ, and inducing a reliance on Christ's merits and
offices, and His whole mediatorial work. And in that propor tion men
abandon or forego all confidence in the flesh.

The Pauline Epistles, which yet remain to be noticed, contain only a few
additional allusions, and our survey of them may be brief.

The Epistle to the COLOSSIANS, written to anchor the Church in sound
doctrine against erroneous views, contains but one express allusion to
the doctrine of the Spirit, though the whole Epistle implies it. The
apostle, referring to Epaphras, says: " Who also declared to us your
love in the Spvrit " (i. 8). The Greek exegetes, followed by not a few
Protestants, throw this into the vague phrase: " spiritual love," as
contrasted with ordinary love in the relations of life. The love was to
be exercised toward Paul, who was absent, and not personally known to
the Colossians; and hence he calls it " your love in the Spirit,"
because the Spirit was its producing cause or author. The love to the
saints was a fruit of the Spirit, as is elsewhere described.

The Epistles to the THESSALONIANS contain the following allusions to the
doctrine of the Spirit. When the apostle recalls their first reception
of the gospel, he says: "Our gospel came not unto you in word only, but
also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and much assurance " (1 Thess. i.
5). Various interpretations have been given of these words, but they
offer, really, little difficulty. The obvious meaning suggested by the
antithesis is, that the gospel was accom panied with converting power;
and when it is added : " and in the Holy Ghost," Calvin makes the
expression refer merely to THE AUTHOR of the previously mentioned power.
Others refer the words to the gifts of the Spirit, especially the super
natural gifts conferred upon believers in the apostolic age to confirm
the truth (Gal. iii. 2). Whether we accept the one view or the other,
there was a full certainty (irX\^po\^opia), a complete and perfect
satisfaction, from which all dubiety was removed. According to this
interpretation, the terms do not refer to the power with which Paul
preached, as many suppose, but to the experience of the Thessalonians
who received the Spirit.

There are allusions also to the sin of despising the Spirit and of
quenching the Spirit. As to the first, it is said: " He that despiseth,
despiseth not man, but God, who hath also given to us His Holy Spirit"
(1 Thess. iv. 8). This seems to refer to the inspiration and
supernatural guidance given to the apostles in revealing divine truth.
As to quenching the Spirit (1 Thess. v. 19), the allusion must either be
to supernatural gifts, as some interpret the passage, or to the
testimony of the Spirit, which through sinful practices, indifference,
or neglect, may be quenched. It is best to understand it of the
supernatural operation of the Spirit, as the following verse, containing
a warning not to despise prophecy, seems to imply.

" God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation THROUGH
SANCTIFICATION OF THE SPIRIT and belief of the truth " (2 Thess. ii.
13). The believing reception of the gospel was effected by the Spirit
changing their hearts. The apostle, by the phrase: " the sanctification
of the Spirit," means the cause by which their effectual calling was
begun and carried out. The Spirit produced a full separation in heart
and tone of mind from an ungodly world, thus setting apart all who were
included in God's gracious purpose or decree. He works faith in them as
the Spirit of sanctification.

When we examine the two EPISTLES TO TIMOTHY, only two allusions to the
doctrine of the Spirit call for special mention. In the first Epistle,
He who was manifest in the flesh is said to be justified in the Spirit
(1 Tim. iii. 6). Of all the explana tions that have been attempted of
this expression, only two deserve attention. The one is, that He had
proclaimed Him self the Son of God, and been put to death as a
blasphemer, and that He was now raised up by His own divine nature, and
justified in all that He claimed to be. The other interpretation, which
I prefer, is, that He was put to death under the charge of our imputed
guilt, as our Surety, but justified by the Holy Spirit when He rose.

The SECOND EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY repeats the frequent expression: " the
Holy Ghost that dwelleth in us" (2 Tim. i. 14), which may be taken as
the brief formula of all living Christianity. The charge to Timothy to
keep the gospel doctrine committed to him, was to be carried out only by
depend ence on the Spirit, and in believing prayer for His influences: "
Keep through the HOLY GHOST which dwelleth in us."

The EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS, which, with the Greek Church, I accept as of
Pauline origin, brings out several points in the doctrine of the Spirit.
As to the person of Christ, it sets forth how the Redeemer, through the
eternal Spirit, offered Himself without spot to God (Heb. ix. 14), and
how God anointed Him with the Holy Ghost as the oil of gladness above
His fellows as His reward (i. 9). The testi mony ta the work of the
Spirit in the inspiration of Scripture is very emphatic, e.g.: the Holy
Ghost says (Heb. iii. 7); the Holy Ghost signifying this (ix. 8);
whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us (x. 15). The vast array
of miracles and supernatural gifts with which the preaching of the
gospel or the New Economy was ushered in is described as the
accompanying testimony of God, with signs and wonders, and divers
miracles and GIFTS OF THE HOLY GHOST according to His own will (ii. 4).
The two difficult passages which in volve the apostasy of some
professing Christians after being made partakers of the Holy Ghost (vi.
4), and where the parties have done despite to the Spirit of grace (x.
29), are instances of men receiving only the supernatural gifts, 1 not
true grace.

1 So Klinkcnberg puts it; compare Matt. vii. 22. If we take this view,
which is every way preferable, we need not labour, as Owen and others
have done, to meet the arguments of those who contend against the
perseverance of the saints from this text.

THE TESTIMONY OF JAMES. {.caption}
=======================

The Epistle of James, directed against a nominal Chris tianity, or dead
faith which had begun to prevail in his time, draws a line between
nature and grace through all life. James contrasts spiritual religion
with that forgetful hearing which, under the empty form, neither keeps
itself unspotted from the world, nor exhibits the honour, the love, the
benevolence which the law written on the heart prompts. He described
that hollow profession by the licence given to the tongue, and by the
vain boast of wisdom on which it plumed itself. Though he only once
mentions the Spirit, the entire Epistle takes for granted the necessity
of the Spirit's renewing grace. He bids those who lack wisdom ask it of
God by believing prayer (Jas. i. 5). He implies the Spirit's agency when
he says that every good gift and every perfect gift is from above (i.
17). He assumes the Spirit's work of regeneration by the word of truth
as the foundation of all (i. 18). The tenor of the Epistle implies that
the Holy Spirit, the author of faith, first enters the Christian heart
as His habitation, and then makes it a temple worthy of Himself. In the
only passage where he definitely names the Spirit, he emphatically
expresses this, viz.: " Do ye think that the Spirit saith in vain, The
spirit that dwclleth in ws lusteth to envy ? " This confessedly diffi
cult passage is better translated: " Do you think that the Spirit
speaketh in vain ? Doth the spirit that dwclleth in us lust to envy ?"
If we compare these words with the com mon style of the apostles, who
speak of the Spirit as the great Inhabitant of the Christian heart, no
doubt can exist that the allusion is to the Holy Spirit (Eom. viii. 9 ;
2 Tim. i. 14; 1 John iii. 34), who dwells in believers, and instructs,
com forts, and sanctifies them. One of the most comprehensive
descriptions of a Christian is that he is a man in whom theHoly Spirit
dwells. The pointed inquiry of the Apostle James to the envious and
contentious men to whom he addressed himself is: Can the Holy Spirit
have His habi tation in a heart replete with envy ? And the emphatic
answer, tacitly implied, is: No. But (that is, on the contrary, Se) He
giveth more grace. The meaning is: the Holy Spirit makes the man in whom
He dwells to cherish no envy at another's welfare, but rather wish to
see their blessings aug mented ; and the same Spirit gives more grace to
him who is thus minded, or makes him the recipient of more grace. On
that man he confers richer communications of grace. As to the
interpretation of the passage, it is not without its diffi culties, as
the quotation is not found in so many words in Scripture. Some refer it
to the antediluvians (Gen. vi. 3), others to the Book of Proverbs (Prov.
iii. 34). Not to mention far-fetched interpretations, it seems rather to
refer to Moses' conduct in the matter of Eldad and Medad, when Joshua,
from a desire for the honour of Moses, would have forbidden them to
prophesy. But Moses said: " Enmest tlwu for my sake?" (Num. xi. 29).

THE TESTIMONY OF PETEK.

On the day of Pentecost Peter expounded and applied the prophecy of Joel
as to the pouring out of the Spirit in the last days, pointing to the
stupendous display of supernatural phenomena and of spiritual gifts, and
declaring : " This is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel" (Acts
ii. 16). On another occasion he represented Jesus as anointed with the
Holy Ghost and with power (x. 38). And as to the giving of the Spirit to
the Gentiles, irrespective of all national distinc tions, he answered
expressly that God gave them the Holy Ghost, and put no difference
between the Jews and them (xv. 8).

But let us more narrowly examine the Petrine Epistles. When we examine
what titles Peter applies to the 'Spirit, we find the following: "the
Spirit of Christ" (1 Pet. i. 11); the, Spirit of God, intimating God and
the Spirit who proceeds from God (iv. 14); "the Spirit of glory,"
resting like the Shechina on the persecuted Christian (iv. 14). As to
the ancient prophets, he says THAT THE SPIRIT OF CHRIST which was in
them testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ and the glory that
should follow (i. 11); in a word, announced the cross and crown of the
Redeemer. That passage furnished a convincing proof that Christ had a
divine pre-existence, and that His Spirit, prior to the incarnation,
guided the inspired writers in all their predictions. Attempts have been
made, indeed, to explain this away; and modern divines, such as Weiss,
who deny Christ's pre-existence, put this construction on the statement:
that the Messiah - Spirit, before He came, was working in the prophets.
For such an evacuating comment there exists no ground; it is but a fore
gone Sabellian conclusion.

Nor are we to explain the expression which is applied to Christ: " Put
to death in the flesh, but quickened by THE SPIRIT," in any other way
than as an allusion to the Holy Ghost. It is neither Christ's human
spirit simply, nor the divine nature of our Lord, though both
interpretations have found almost equal favour with recent commentators.
It appears from the following verse that we must rather think of the
Holy Spirit in which, it is said, Christ went and preached to the
spirits in prison—that is, by Noah as a preacher of righteousness. And
we have only to compare this text with the passage previously expounded
(1 Pet. i. 11), to be fully convinced that the reference is to the
Spirit of Christ which was in the prophets. That the Redeemer was
quickened and raised up by the Holy Spirit, is not obscurely intimated
by the Apostle Paul (Rom. viii. 11). The same Spirit that formed
Christ's human body and gave it life in His mother's womb, gave to Him
the restored life when He rose from the dead. He who raised up Christ
from the dead, indeed, is frequently mentioned as one of the Father's
most memorable titles or designations; and to prove that it was the
Spirit who performed this work, we have only to recall the fact that the
Holy Ghost is the executive in every divine operation (Eom. iv. 24, vi.
4).

To the Spirit also is ascribed the Christian's sauctification: " Elect,
IN (eV) sanctification of the Spirit, TO obedience and sprinkling of the
blood of Christ" (1 Pet. i. 2). The Holy Spirit, by the gospel,
separates Christians, or sets them apart, in a peculiar way, from the
common mass of men; and the blessings enjoyed are the fruit of the
Spirit's sanctify ing power. As the prophets had the Spirit, so, Peter
adds, the apostles, in like manner, preached with the Holy Ghost sent
down from heaven (i. 12). In the second Epistle it must be noticed that
the only allusion to the Spirit is in connection with the inspiration of
the prophets, who spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost (2 Pet. i.
21).

THE TESTIMONY OF THE APOSTLE JUDE. {.caption}
==================================

The EPISTLE OF JUDE was directed against a body of licentious errorists
who had crept into the Church, and were corrupting it by their doctrines
and practice. These were evil, and there was no room to entertain doubts
respecting their character. The apostle accordingly appeals, by way of
warning, to some terrible instances of judgment recorded in Scripture—to
the Israelites who were destroyed in their unbelief after coming out of
Egypt (ver. 5); to the angels who kept not their first estate (ver. 6);
to Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbouring cities (ver. 7). Two
references are made to the Holy Spirit within the compass of this small
Epistle,—the one alluding to the errorists, the other to the Christians
whom he exhorts.

​1. " These are they who separate themselves, sensual (•\^rv\^iKoi),
having not the Spirit" (ver. 19). The adjective rendered semual here and
in the Epistle of James (Jas. iii. 15) is elsewhere rendered natural, or
the natural man (1 Cor. ii. 14). The expression means simply one in a
state of nature, or unregenerate, and without the Spirit. This cannot be
doubtful to any one who considers the antithesis in which it is placed
by three apostles. Expositors have brought more learning to the
elucidation of the term (•\^•V\^JLKOL} than was necessary. What a
natural man denotes is easily discerned by the antithesis in which it
stands to the spiritual man, who is one that has received the Spirit.
The natural man is one who has merely natural reason, not the
Spirit,—that is, the animal man, as Melanchthon expounds it,—one living
accord ing to reason, like Zeno or Saul, though not necessarily in gross
vices. As to the next phrase: having not the Spirit, it conveys the idea
that the natural man has not the Spirit, and is the antithesis to what
is said, that the true Christian HAS the Spirit. On the contrary, he who
has not the Spirit is not Christ's (Eoin. viii. 9). We must understand
the Holy Spirit, and the apostle pronounces it an indisputable truth
that natural men, whether addicted to the grosser vices, like those
errorists, or practically exempt from them, have not the Spirit —that
is, do not possess the Holy Spirit, who, as a divine inhabitant,
occupies the heart of all believers, and sanctifies and renews them
after the divine image.

​2. The second reference to the Spirit in this Epistle, interwoven with
other essential elements of the spiritual life, is: " But ye, beloved,
building up yourselves on your most holy faith, PRAYING IN THE HOLY
GHOST, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life" (vers. 20, 21). This implies a life
in the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, a life of prayer resulting from
that fellowship. The Christians to whom the apostle wrote are exhorted
to build themselves up on their faith, which implies all the objects of
faith as a foundation. They are taught that they are not simply to be
passive, but to some extent active in the process, and especially taught
to pray in the Holy Ghost, who prompts the matter of all true
prayer,—opening men's eyes to discover their poverty, and showing them
the value of spiritual things,—exciting true faith,—and imbuing them
with right affections. All true prayer is shown to be prayer in the Holy
Ghost.

THE TESTIMONY OF THE APOSTLE JOHN. {.caption}
==================================

On the subject of the Holy Spirit we find comparatively little in the
Epistles of John—less, in fact, than every one expects to find when he
comes to the examination of it. The reason might be that the Gospel of
John had set forth in the Lord's own words the most full and exhaustive
delineation of the doctrine of the Spirit, and we are supposed to carry
those disclosures of His Gospel with us in the perusal of the Epistle
and Apocalypse.

Though the Epistle alludes more to the Spirit's work than to the
personal relations of the Trinity, there are passages which show Him
personally distinct from the Father and the Son. As often as the apostle
speaks of the Spirit, he speaks of Him as communicated (1 John ii. 20),
and as given to us (1 John iii. 24); and he plainly shows that he
regards the communication as imparted to us by the Son. As to the names
or titles given to Him, He is called the Spirit of God (1 John iv. 2),
sent forth from God (e/e TOU &eov, 1 John iv. 3); the Spirit of truth,
because He opens the mind to truth, and teaches it to distinguish truth
from error (1 John iv. 6). He is called the unction from the Holy One,
who anoints the followers of Christ as He anointed Christ Himself (1
John ii. 20, 27).

It is said, the Spirit is truth (1 John v. 6); the meaning of which, in
that connection, seems to be that one may securely rely on the testimony
of the Spirit as an infallible witness, because He is the truth itself.

We have specially to inquire in what sense THE SPIRIT is said TO BEAR
WITNESS in the much canvassed passage which refers to the THREE
WITNESSES on earth (1 John v. 6, S). 1 Without subjecting all the
opinions to examination, it may suffice to say that the WATER and BLOOD
first named cannot naturally be referred to the two sacraments, or to
the blood and water which flowed from the pierced side of our Lord,
though both opinions are maintained by eminent expositors. We rather
understand by the first witness, Christ's baptism and the miraculous
events connected with it, which clearly attested His Messianic
commission. We must understand by THE BLOOD, His departure to the
Father, or the termination of His earthly task by the atoning sacrifice,
which was accompanied by the most striking miracles (Matt, xxvii. 51).
The THIRD WITNESS, that of THE SPIRIT, is none other than the effusion
of the Spirit, first given on the day of Pentecost, the Spirit that
spoke by the mouth of all the apostles, who preached with the Holy Ghost
sent down from heaven—the Spirit who accompanied their oral testimony
with stupendous miracles, and who moved them in their writings. The
apostle's words were accompanied with signs and wonders and divers
miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost (Heb. ii. 4). But it was not all
objective. The Spirit's testimony was also internal—that is, He made all
internally efficacious and available to the elect.

The apostle refers also to Christian assurance when he says: " We know
that He abideth in us by the Spirit which He hath given us" (1 John iii.
24 and iv. 13). As Paul calls the Spirit the EARNEST, so John declares
that the Holy Spirit given to Christians gives them a knowledge and an
assurance of divine love.

I have now briefly to refer to THE APOCALYPSE, the only remaining work
of the Apostle John. The salutation with

1 All text-critics and exegetes now let go 1 John v. 7 as no longer
tenable. It was probably a mere note on the margin inserted in the text
by a subsequent transcriber, which the book opens contains an allusion
to the Spirit, but in a way peculiar to John. Paul's manner in
invocating blessings on the several Churches to whom he writes was to
ask " grace and peace from God the Fatfier and the Lord Jesus Christ;"
and he does not name the Spirit, because the Spirit was implied or
understood in the blessings which were communicated. They were imparted
by the agency of the Holy Ghost, who applies redemption. John, according
to his peculiar manner, invocates grace and peace from the whole
Trinity,—from the Father, called " Him who is, and who was, and who is
to come;" FROM THE SPIRIT, represented as the seven Spirits which are
before the throne; and from Jesus Christ (Rev. i. 4). The seven Spirits
in the plural indicate the manifold and various operations of the Holy
Ghost in the application of grace, with a reference to the seven gifts
mentioned in Isaiah (xi. 2), or with an allusion to the seven Churches.
Throughout the Apocalypse this style of description is repeatedly used
to represent the Spirit as resting on Christ for the great ends which
were involved in the execution of the Covenant. Thus, in the third
chapter, we read : " These things saith He that hath the seven Spirits
of God and the seven stars" (Rev. iii. 1). In the fourth chapter the
apostle describes a door opened in heaven, while the writer says : "
Immediately I was in the Spirit" (iv. 2); and he adds: " there were
seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the seven
Spirits of God " (iv. 5). In the fifth chapter, the apostle describes
what he beheld in connection \\vith the book written within and without,
and sealed with seven seals, which no man in heaven or in earth could
open: " I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne and of the four
living creatures, and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb, as it
had been slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are THE SEVEN
SPIRITS of God sent forth into all the earth." The design of these
passages was to set forth the communication of the Holy Spirit in the
infinite supplies which Christ imparts, as the Spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge
and of the fear of the Lord (Isa. xi. 2), and as all resting on Christ.

The apostle says at the beginning: " I was in the Spirit on the Lord's
day " (i. 10). When Christ sends the seven Epistles to the seven
Churches, He bids them hear what the Spirit speaketh to the Churches
(ii. 7); for it is the personal Holy Ghost that speaks in and by the
gospel, and that speaks in all the word of truth. And the book closes
with the call: "THE SPIRIT and the Bride say, Come "—that is, the Church
moved by the Spirit says, " Conie."

SECOND DIVISION. LECTUEE I. {.caption}
===========================

THE PERSONALITY AND PROCESSION OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. {.caption}
--------------------------------------------------

I purpose to discuss to-day the DIVINE PERSONALITY of the Holy Spirit.
This is a point on which few doubts may be entertained by the vast
majority of believing men among us. But it must not be passed over. Nor
must attention be absorbed with the WORK of the Spirit so as to forget
HIMSELF. All history proves, for instance, that to give exclusive
prominence to the work of Christ while the personal Eedeemer is left in
the background, ends, for the most part, in placing a mere dogma where
Christ Himself should be. The divine dignity of the Spirit demands, in
like manner, that no obscuring influence shall come between the soul and
the agency of the living person; and in the whole investigation on which
it is necessary to enter, we must be upon our guard against being swayed
either by the sound of words, which decide nothing, or by those refining
speculations which are more shadowy than solid.

As to the divine personality of the Spirit, there are two modes by which
we prove it. We prove it a priori, from the fact of the eternal
procession, as we prove the divine per sonality of the Son from the fact
of the eternal generation; for these immanent acts of God underlie
respectively the per sonal distinctions in the Godhead. Or we prove it a
posteriori, from the unquestionable evidences of divine personality
which are given in the sacred Scriptures in connection with His works.
We shall begin with the latter, and proceed step by step, taking up in
order first the PERSONALITY, and then the PROCESSION of the Spirit.

It is clear to every mind that, after His personality is established, no
further proof can reasonably be demanded to show that such a Person must
be God. If He is not an in fluence or energy, but a personal agent, it
follows on grounds the most conclusive that He is not lower than Supreme
God. Hence the objections adduced in opposition to the doctrine of the
Spirit mainly turn at present against the proof of His personality. For
to no created being can the actions which are ascribed to Him be fitly
or competently applied.

My object is to show that the Spirit of God is as truly a Person as the
Father or the Son,—a Person in whom mind resides, and to whom men
perform actions which are either culpable or acceptable. That divine
personality is asserted against two currents of opinion which agitated
the Church in early times,—the Sabellian and Arian heresies, which reci
procally evoked each other, and are ever ready to captivate minds which
miss the safe middle way. The former is the negation of the Spirit's
personality, the latter the denial of His Deity. All who deviate in our
day from the Church-doctrine are led by a strong Sabellian bias to
consider the Holy Spirit as a mere influence or divine energy without
per sonality,—a theory called the indwelling scheme by some, but only a
form of Unitarianism. The Arian or Macedonian opinion, which described
the Spirit as a creature, is little favoured at present, but may at any
moment reappear, accord ing to the strange vitality which is the
accompaniment of error. At present Sabellianism is the error of wide
diffusion and power, and it is adopted by many who come under the spell
of German theology. These theologians evade the force of the Scripture
proof by treating ths passages as rhetorical personifications or figures
of speech, even while they dilate on the advantages of using only the
grammatico-historical method of interpretation. They speak not of the
Holy Spirit, but of the COMMON SPIRIT OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH, which, in
fact, means nothing more than an esprit de corps, and detaches itself
from all obligation to accept the doctrine of the personal Holy Ghost.
How far modern theology is alienated from this en tire domain of
doctrine is known only to those whose special studies have led them to
institute inquiries as to the German current of theological thought, and
as to the multitudes in every land who have come under its influence.
The per sonality of the Holy Ghost is treated by these divines as a
dogma, for the acceptance of which no sufficient ground is found either
in Scripture or experience. 1

When Scripture alludes to the Holy Spirit, the personal terms conveying
the idea of MIND, WILL, and SPONTANEOUS ACTION are so numerous that they
may be regarded, not as the occasional, but as the general, nay, uniform
and unvaried usage; and it is a usage observed by all the sacred
writers, without a single exception. It is observed by the Old Tes
tament writers and by the New Testament writers alike. It is retained as
the natural expression of their thoughts, even in passages where the
writers, without the slightest trace of emotion or elevation in their
style, write and speak as simple narrators of historic facts (Acts ii.
15), or convey plain and practical instruction (Eph. iv. 30). To deny
that there is any allusion to a person in such references to the Spirit,
betrays either deep-seated bias and prejudice, or lack of exegetical
aptitude and capacity.

1 Dr. Kahnis says, in the preface to his work, die Lehre vom Heiligen
Geiste, 1847, of which only a first part was published : " was die
neuere Theoloyie betrijft, so sagt Baumgarten-Crusius (compendium der
Dogmen Geschichte, ii. p. 189, Anm. 4), dass der neuere Protestantismus
die Personlichkeit des Heiligen Geistes aufgegeben hat. Das wenigstens
ist wahr dass die strengkirchliche Dog-matik diese Lehre ziemlich
unvermittelt hinstellt, die Vermittelnde Theologie der man Kirchlichen
Grund und Boden nicht stteitig machen kann, meist negativ dazu steht. "

To evade or explain away these proofs of personality, two modes have
been adopted, having not even the semblance of probability. The one
evasion is, that the expressions mean nothing more than AN ABSTRACT
QUALITY ; and the other is, that they are instances of TROPICAL
LANGUAGE. It may suffice to reply, that few examples of rhetorical
personification occur in any history written in simple prose, and that
this holds true pre-eminently of the New Testament, where the writers of
set purpose make use of a natural, popular style. In these perspicuous
narratives, there was neither occasion nor scope in any of the allusions
to the Holy Spirit for a highly figura tive diction ; and when a
personal agent is referred to, it is out of keeping with the nature of
their composition to under stand the terms of a quality or influence. We
must under stand one in whom intelligence arid will reside. It would be
the most violent and far-fetched of all conceivable modes of
interpretation, to lay it down as a rule—as this theory must do—that
whenever the speakers or writers, either in the Old or New Testament,
turned their mind toward the doctrine of the Spirit, they instantly
abandoned all the plain and easy style familiar to them, and resorted to
rhetorical personifica tion, prosopopcea, and the most high-wrought
figures which language can sustain, when their object was to be
understood in the language which they used. To suppose such- a thing is
a sufficient refutation of that whole mode of interpretation. If Jesus
and His apostles uniformly represented the Holy Spirit as a Person when
He is not a Person, it would be the boldest personification ever found
in any literature upon any subject.

Not only so; the apostles lived at a time when their assailants, the
Gnostics, transmuted divine operations into emanations and persons. We
may therefore, with Michaelis, pronounce it impossible—a thing,
certainly, not to be believed —that they should so frequently resort to
rhetorical personifi cation in reference to the Holy Ghost, and thus
give occasion to regard Him as a Person, if, in the use of such terms,
they did not think of Him as possessed of a divine personality.

It is not denied that there are passages where impersonal things are so
described that at first they might seem to be taken as personal
qualities. The two instances most frequently adduced are these: " The
wind bloweth where it listeth," and " The blood of sprinkling that
speaketh better things than that of Abel" (Heb. xii. 24). No man of
ordinary capacity, will ing to weigh the force of words, will for a
moment doubt that these are figurative expressions, personifications
which no man can mistake. The delineation of charity is so given (1 Cor.
xiii. 1—8) that we may call it another instance of this personification.
Every one sees that it is a vivid way of de--picting the various
activities of love in the whole conduct of a living Christian. But it is
a wholly different case when we can show, in reference to the doctrine
of the Spirit, that this mode of speaking is general, unvaried, uniform;
that it is adopted by all the sacred writers with one consent; and that
it is retained even in the simplest passages where they narrate facts or
give plain instruction.

It is common among modern theologians, swayed by a Sabellian bias, to
allege that the name " Spirit of God" means no more than God Himself,
without reference to a personal distinction which, indeed, they do not
believe; that Scripture contains such anthropomorphisms as the face of
God, the name of God, the soul of God, as metaphors for God Him self ;
and that the expression " Spirit of God" is of similar import. To meet
this misapprehension, it is not enough to show that the Spirit is
possessed of divine properties, but that He is also personally distinct
from the Father and the Son. The fact that the Spirit is named as
occupying a co-ordinate rank with the other persons of the Godhead,
supplies a valid argument against which no objection can be advanced.

It is also urged that the term PERSON is not Biblical, and is capable of
being much perverted. But every thoughtful inquirer perceives that the
terrn " person" is only used for convenience' sake; that it is an
ecclesiastical usage, like the words trinity, sacrament, and the like;
and that it became current in the Oriental as well as Western Church,
simply because a generic term was found necessary to point out the three
subsistents in the Godhead. It has at the same time been always admitted
that the use of this particular term was adopted only to avoid
circumlocution; and that if a better term could be substituted for it
with a general consent, no one would contend for it as indispensable.
But with the doctrine underlying the expression the case is wholly
different. That cannot be surrendered. Only remove from the use of the
term every notion involving imperfection, as we do without difficulty
when eyes, ears, or fingers are applied to God, from the mere lack of
vocables to express the fit idea, and it must be admitted that in human
language no term can be found better fitted to express the Church's
meaning than the term person. Because we must use intelligible language,
no diffi culty should be felt in calling the Holy Spirit a Person.

The evidence for the personality of the Holy Spirit, it may be remarked,
though often indirect, is not less convincing. For the Scriptures were
not written in such a way as to over bear those who challenge every
statement till they are subdued by evidence, and who commonly find or
make the stumbling-blocks which they wish to meet, but for true
inquirers, for receptive minds and honest hearts, which feel the need of
redemption, and can be satisfied with a sufficient amount of evidence.
The evidence consists in the uniform teaching of Scripture, and in the
fact that no counter statements refute it. It amounts to this: (1) That
the Spirit is not the Father or the Son, but distinct from both; (2)
that He is an agent possessed of intelligence and will, power and
wisdom, which come to light in deeds performed with a design; (3) that
the masculine pronouns applied to Him, and the nature of the mission on
which He is sent, attest a Person.

The Scriptures distinctly recognise the Spirit as a Person. We have only
to recall the language used in reference to THE COMFORTER to be
convinced of this. To compensate for the loss incurred by the departure
of the Lord Jesus to the Father, He promised that He would send another
Comforter, who should take His place as their immediate Teacher, Helper,
and Protector, and thus supply the want of His own presence, the
anticipated loss of which filled them with trouble and dismay. When we
look at the Persons referred to in that promise, it would be a
perversion of language to suppose that a mere quality or influence is
meant in any of the personal allusions. The sender is certainly
different from the person who is sent: for we do not speak of sending a
quality on an errand. Nor does ANY ONE SEND HIMSELF FROM HIMSELF, as the
Sabellian 1 must put it when he interprets the words: " When THE
COMFORTER is come, whom I WILL send to you FROM the Father" (John xv.
26). Whether we accept one rendering or another of the word Comforter,
whether we make it TEACHER with Ernesti, or HELPER, or ADVOCATE, or
PATRON with others, it is obvious to every mind that He who was to
compensate the disciples and the Church, of which they were the first -
fruits, for the loss of Christ's visible presence, was certainly a
Person. The refusal to accept the Spirit's personality in that text
compels the interpreter, if consistent with himself, TO DENY THE
PERSONALITY OF CHRIST in whose room He came. That is the alternative
before him which no ingenuity can evade. And the absurdity is not less
obvious of identifying the title Comforter or Paraclete with the
impersonal gifts which the apostles subsequently received. That such a
comment is untenable, is clear from the explicit announcements that the
Spirit should teach them all things (John xiv. 26); guide them into all
truth (xvi. 13); bring all things to their remembrance (xiv. 26);
glorify Christ by

' l See e.g. Dr. Weiss' Lehrbuch der Biblischen Theoloyw, 1868 ; Grimm's
WUMs Lexicon, 1868,—both in a Sabellian tendency.

receiving of His, and showing it to His disciples (xvi. 14). It is not
possible more explicitly to distinguish a person from the works which he
performs. Nor ought we to omit a note worthy peculiarity in the THREE
passages which refer to the Comforter. A change of gender in the use of
the masculine demonstrative pronoun (e/eetvo?) forestalls the
possibility of putting any other sense than a personal reference upon
the words. Thus it is said: " The Comforter, the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my name, He (eicelvos') shall teach you all things"
(John xiv. 26); "When the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you
from the Father, the Spirit of truth who proceedeth from the Father, He
(e/cetz/o?) shall testify of me ;" " Howbeit, when He (eiceivos), the
Spirit of truth, is come, He will guide you into all truth: for He shall
not speak of [better: from] Himself; but whatsoever He shall hear, that
shall He speak, and He will show you things to come. He (e'/cetf09)
shall glorify me" (xvi. 13, 14).

The unbiassed sense of unlettered men, who are beyond the influence of
the theological currents, is alive to the fact that the meaning of many
passages is lost, unless we think of the Holy Ghost as a Person, and not
as a mere influence or energy. To lie to the Holy Ghost (Acts v. 3), to
grieve the Holy Spirit of God (Eph. iv. 30), are expressions which, as
every reflecting mind perceives, imply a Person who is pleased or
displeased; and they cannot, with any propriety or fitness, be referred
to what is impersonal.

The Book of Acts, specially prepared, as we have seen, to exhibit
historically the Spirit's operations in the Church after the Lord's
ascension, contains allusions to the personal leading of the Spirit on
the mind of all Christ's servants, and in the formation of the various
Churches. Thus He said to Philip, who had been directed to the way along
which the chamber lain of the Ethiopian Queen was returning home: " Go
near and join thyself to this chariot" (viii. 29); and after that
mission was successfully accomplished, the Spirit of the Lord

caught away Philip (viii. 39). To Peter, when the deputation from
Cornelius arrived at Joppa, the Spirit said: " Behold, three men seek
thee" (x. 19). When Saul of Tarsus was set apart to his great Gentile
commission, which made him in a peculiar sense the apostle of the
Gentiles, the Holy Ghost said to the prophets and teachers who were
ministering to the Lord in the Church at Antioch : " Separate to me
Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them " (xiii. 2).
When Paul and Timothy attempted to go into Bithynia, the Spirit suffered
them not (xvi. 7). When the members constituting the council at
Jerusalem gave forth the result of their delibera tions for the guidance
of the Churches in reference to the observance of the Jewish rites, they
said: " It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us" (xv. 28)—language
which could not have been used if the Holy Spirit were nothing but an
influence. When He commissioned the apostles, and either directed or
forbade them to do this or that according to His will, the language
attests a free and sovereign agent, unless we are prepared to abandon
the literal sense of words and the style of historic narrative.
Fritzsche, in his learned treatise on the Spirit, 1 correctly maintains
— though the treatise is unsatisfactory as a statement of ecclesiastical
doctrine—that it is clear as noon-day that Scripture speaks of a Person
or subsistence, not of a divine influence or energy; and the Christian
Church from the beginning, notwithstanding the deflections of
individuals, may be said to have asserted the Spirit's personality, and
to have based it on the Scriptures. Collecting the evidence supplied by
the survey of Scripture, we may put the arguments for the personality of
the Spirit under the six following heads:—

​1. The personal actions ascribed to Him abundantly

prove it (John xiv. 26 ; 1 Cor. xii. 11).

​2. His distinction from the Father and the Son, and His

mission from both, prove it (John xv. 26).

1 Dr. Christ. Frid. Fritzsche, Nova Opuscula Academica, 1846.

​3. The co-ordinate rank and power which belong to Him

equally with the Father and the Son prove it (Matt. xxviii. 19; 2 Cor.
xiii. 14).

​4. His appearance under a visible form at the baptism of

Christ and on the day of Pentecost proves it.

​5. The sin against the Holy Ghost implying a Person

proves it.

​6. The way in which He is distinguished from His gifts

proves it (1 Cor. xii. 11).

The glorification of the Holy Ghost in connection with the Church is
still future. Passage after passage might be adduced to show that He
occupies a co-ordinate rank with the other Persons. But the completion
of the Church opens a vista into the future. The appearance of Christ
among men ushered in a full historical revelation of the Son in word and
deed; and the abasement to which He stooped was followed by an equally
conspicuous exaltation. With the Holy Ghost it is not so as yet. He
dwells in redeemed hearts bought with a price. He occupies a co-ordinate
rank. But His luork is still unseen. The personality and Deity of the
Spirit are, however, one day to be displayed in con spicuous glory in
connection with His work upon the Church, when He shall have completed
the marvellous transformation. The final issue in the glory reflected
from every redeemed and perfected saint, and from the entire body of
Christ now scattered over every country, and visited from hour to hour
with new communications of wisdom, grace, and power, but then seen to be
united to their glorious Head, will be worthy of the divine workman who
is carrying on His transforming work, and raising up a temple in which
the Godhead shall dwell for ever. At present the divine personality of
the Spirit is less perceptible, because it is not beheld in connec tion
with the accomplished work. The redeemed are not yet perfect; the Church
is not yet complete. There is still another stage of revelation, when
the Spirit shall be glorified

in connection with the work which He shall have finished and brought to
its destined completeness. 1

ON THE PROCESSION OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

The words of Christ on which this discussion largely turns are these: "
When the Comforter is come, whom I will send to you from the Father,
even the Spirit of truth, who pro-ceedeth from the Father" (John xv.
26). These three things challenge our attention: (1) The mission of the
Spirit by Christ from the Father; (2) the essential relation prior to
that mission, and on which that mission rests: " who pro-ceedeth from
the Father" (6 irapa rov irarpo\^ eKTropeverai); the words " from the
Father" corresponding to what is said of the generation of the Son, the
Only-begotten "from the Father " (irapa Trarpo\^ ; (3) the present
tense, " proceedeth," intimates an immanent ever-during present.

Some hold that the name HOLY SPIRIT refers exclusively to His office in
man's salvation. But it is necessary to distin guish when truth and
error are confusedly put together. The designation SPIRIT OF GOD is the
distinctive name of the third person of the Godhead, denoting a divine
subsistent, with intelligence and will, proceeding from another. The
epithet HOLY, frequently conjoined with the term SPIRIT, gives us a
nearer view of the Spirit's SPECIAL WORK in connection with man's
salvation, and suggests an antithesis to every unholy spirit, whether
human or Satanic. The procession of the Spirit is spoken of by our Lord
in connection with a refer ence to the covenant of grace,\* and
doubtless the reason is to show that the natural order in the Godhead is
also the order in the execution of the covenant of grace. Had we no
other word of Scripture through which to think on this matter, the
single title " THE SPIRIT OF GOD " shows the rela-

1 This is well brought out in Schmid's Biblische Theologie, p. 167.

2 See Lampe's Latin Disputations on the Spirit (vol. ii. p. 151 ff.).

tion of two Persons, the one proceeding from the other, just as the
title " the Son of God" proves the eternal Sonship. He is called—(1) the
Spirit of the Lord (Isa. xi. 2); (2) the Spirit of God (Eom. viii. 9);
(3) the Spirit that proceedeth from the Father (John xv. 26) ; (4) the
Spirit of His Son (Gal. iv. 6); and we should grievously err if we
believed that these phrases have no significance. We ascribe no such
procession to Him as is in any way associated with the idea of
imperfection. We acknowledge, however, something fitly represented by
the analogy of respiration, for it would be irreverence to imagine that
there is no «naloo:v in the terms

O O«-\<

employed.

The more the matter is discussed, the more is Scripture found to warrant
the position that, in the scheme of grace, the acts of the Persons of
the Trinity are found to be accord ing to their order of subsistence in
the Godhead, and are but the visible manifestation of that order in the
divine essence. The Spirit could not be called the Spirit of the Father,
or the Spirit of Him who raised up Christ from the dead (Horn. viii.
11), unless He proceeded from the Father. He could not be called the
Spirit of His Son (Gal. iv. 6), or the Spirit of Christ (Eom. viii. 9),
because He replenished the humanity of Jesus. Nor does it appear how the
Spirit could be sent by Him except upon the footing of that procession
by which He is the Spirit of the Son as well as the Spirit of the
Father, and which is eternally continued without a past and without a
future. The question is important in every respect, because it lies at
the foundation of the MISSION OF THE COMFORTER. And as to its practical
results, Church history informs us that it is in the last degree
calamitous to ignore it. 1

Some divines, in other respects orthodox, have recently taken exception
to the eternal procession, as they also do to the eternal Sonship. Thus
the author of an excellent work

1 See an excellent paper referring to the practical importance of this
question, in Rudelbach's Zeitsc/irift fiir Lutherische Thcoloyie, 1849,
p. 13.

on the Spirit, while soundly Trinitarian as to the action of the three
divine Persons in the covenant of grace, unhappily says: " The
spiration, procession, or promanation of the Spirit from the Father, or
from the Father and the Son, are phrases occupying no mean place in the
theology of the early ages. Now, we humbly submit—whatever reverence may
be due to holy synods and to learned men—that such explanations are
founded on an erroneous principle, for they are analyses of human
thoughts or words, not developments of divine realities" (p. 82). 1 They
whose sentiments are thus re-echoed (viz. Eoellius of Holland, Dr.
Wardlaw, Prof. Moses Stuart, and the like) dismiss the subject of the
procession with summary marks of impatience. But by so doing they cut
themselves off from the Patristic literature, as well as from the
Reforma tion, Puritan, and Anglican theology. The Scripture evidence in
support of the procession is conclusive; and it is set forth in a mass
of solid literature, from the earliest times to the present day. The
question of the procession, analogous as it is in all respects to the
question of the eternal Sonship, deserves and rewards a full
investigation.

They who err in this article depart from the confession of a doctrine
which the entire Church of God has taught and enforced from the days of
the apostles. And the denial of this truth carries with it the most
perilous consequences. (1) If there be no generation or procession, and
if the names FATHER, SON, AND SPIRIT have respect merely to the covenant
of grace, it would follow that these names are but official names, and
have no essential relation underlying them. (2) It would follow that the
Father could act in an isolated way without the Son and Holy Spirit, and
that they, again, could act from themselves apart from the Father,
without any natural and necessary relation of the one to the other. (3)
It would follow that the bond of unity between the Persons was really
subverted or overthrown. These perilous conse-

1 The Work of the Spirit, by William Hendry Stowell. London, 1849.

quences, especially the two last, may be repudiated; and far be it from
me to burden any man or class of men with con sequences which they do
not themselves accept and avow. But the consequences which are admitted
are one thing, and the consequences which follow logically from an
opinion are another thing. The consequences may be of potent influence
though neither suspected nor acknowledged.

The point to which we have adverted is at the foundation of the unity
and distinction in the Godhead. The three Persons have a natural
relation to each other, both in subsistence and action. They are one in
essence and in operation.

The Biblical foundation of the doctrine that the Spirit is FROM THE SON
as well as from the Father is explicit. Thus it is said : " He shall
glorify me : for He shall receive of mine, and show it unto you" (John
xvi. 14). The import is: HE SHALL, in the sphere of divine truth and
revelation, DELIVER ONLY WHAT I HAVE TAUGHT, and by so doing, GLORIFY ME
as a divine teacher; for it redounds to Christ's glory that no other
doctrine should be taught but that which was derived from Him. Christ
had declared of His own doctrine that it was not His, but the Father's
who sent Him, and that He taught nothing but what He had heard of His
Father—that is, the, Son received all from His Father in the eternal
generation (John xv. 15); and the Spirit receives all by procession from
the Son in the same way as the Spirit of the Son.

The same thing is elsewhere set forth as follows: " For He shall not
speak of Himself [better : from Himself] (d\</\>' eairroG); but
whatsoever He shall hear, that shall He speak " (John xvi. 13). As the
Son said regardiug Himself: "What I hear, I speak," referring to His
ineffable immanence in the Father, so the declaration that the Spirit
should NOT SPEAK FROM HIMSELF, implies that He spoke nothing but what
the Father and Son spoke by Him. There is a certain order, but no
isolation of the one Person from the other ; and the twice-

repeated statement: " He shall receive of mine,"—united as it is with
the declaration that the Son has the essence, attri butes, and
perfections that the Father has,—enables us to understand what is
involved in this procession—viz. that the Holy Ghost receives the same
numerical divine essence with the Father and the Son.

Such has been the belief of the Church from the first as set forth in
all the creeds. It must be accepted AS ESSENTIAL

TO THE PERFECTION OF THE DIVINE NATURE that the Father

have a Son, and that there should be a Spirit proceeding from them both.
The phrase: who proccedeth from the Father, in the present tense
(e/cTropeuerat), intimates an immanent, in ternal, ever-during act
according to the unchangeable essence of the Deity.

THE DEITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT BASED ON THE PROCESSION.

The SUPREME DEITY OF THE SPIRIT is clearly established by the procession
of the Spirit. The expression through which we think, whenever we direct
attention to this doctrine, is the designation THE SPIRIT OF GOD. Like
the analogous designa tion "the Son of God," it sets forth a unique
relation, or a personal distinction, before any work was done. And as we
say that the only Son is supreme God, not although He is the Son, but
because He was begotten of the Father; so we say that the Spirit is
supreme God, not although, but because He proceedeth from the Father and
the Son.

The following fivefold line of proof, when carried out to its legitimate
consequences, and all taking for granted the procession from the Father
and the Son, furnishes conclusive proof of the supreme Deity of the Holy
Spirit:—

​1. The incommunicable acts of creation and providence

ascribed to the Spirit.

​2. Divine attributes ascribed to Him.

​3. Divine honours and worship paid to Him.

​4. The co-ordinate rank in which He is placed with the

Father and the Son.

​5. The name of God indirectly given to Him.

​1. The creation and conservation of all things are attri buted to the
Spirit of God (Gen. i. 6 ; Ps. xxxiii. 6 ; Job xxvi. 13). He who
summoned the world into being, with its countless laws, adjustments, and
concurrent adaptations, is supreme God. The conservation of the
stupendous fabric by what is tantamount to a sustained creation, the
knowledge necessary for a task beyond finite comprehension, the power
that never faints, and the vigilance that never slumbers, argue the
ever-present activity of supreme God. But all that creative energy which
evoked the universe out of nothing, and all the conserving Providence
which sustains it, are ascribed to the Spirit of God. To speak of
delegation, as the Arians have done, is a hypothesis which needs but to
be uttered to be repudiated. For to whom could such activity be
delegated 1 Who could wield the perfections which such a task implies,
but He to whom these divine perfections naturally belong ? The prophet
Isaiah, as if to laugh to scorn the notion of a delegated activity in
such a sphere, thus exclaims: " Who hath measured the waters in the
hollow of His hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended
the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales,
and the hills in a balance ? Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord,
or, being His coiinsellor, hath taught Him ?" A consideration of the
universe with the light which modern science has shed upon its laws,
adjusted as they are with the finest adaptation over all the realms of
nature, affords such a view of the wisdom necessary to plan, and of the
power necessary to uphold them, that none but a divine hand was equal to
the task. But that hand was the Spirit's. And the same argument applies
to all the other acts of the Spirit.

​2. As to the DIVINE ATTRIBUTES ascribed to the Spirit, we

may choose out of the supply of materials furnished to our hand a few of
the properties of supreme Godhead, which He is said to possess, such as
omniscience, omnipresence, and eternity.

We find OMNISCIENCE affirmed of the Spirit when it is said: " God hath
revealed them to us by His Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things,
yea, the deep things of God. For what man knoweth the things of a man,
save the Spirit of man which is in Him ? Even so the things of God
knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God" (1 Cor. ii. 10, 11). The apostle
says that he was in a position to unfold the purposes of God, because
God revealed them to him by His Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all
things, yea, the deep things of God. This is elucidated in the following
verse by an illus tration of a man knowing the things of a man by the
Spirit of man which is in him. The term SEARCH, by analogy transferred
from man to God, does not mean that the Spirit inquires to learn, but
that He intimately knows. The language announces His perfect knowledge
of the hidden counsels of God, and that the Spirit stands in the same
relation to God that the soul of man does to man. The knowledge which
the soul has of man's hidden purposes and resolutions is compared with
the Spirit's knowledge of the secret purposes of God. For He is said (1)
to know all things; (2) to know the deep things of God; (3) to have an
intuitive knowledge with the precision and accuracy which the term
search conveys; (4) to know them with the intimate knowledge with which
a man knows his own counsels.

With regard to the attribute of OMNIPRESENCE or immensity ascribed to
the Holy Spirit, we find a vivid description of it in the psalm
specially prepared to guide the Church's worship on this point: "
Whither shall I go from Thy Spirit ? or whither shall I flee from Thy
presence ?" (Ps. cxxxix. 7). The remark of the anonymous writer in the
Greek CATENA

on this psalm, that His Spirit intimates the Holy Spirit, and His face
the only-begotten Son, is not without probability. 1 But the evidence of
the Spirit's omnipresence is put beyond all doubt. And when we trace the
Spirit's presence as the inhabitant and guide of the believing soul, and
of the Christian Church in all lands at one and the same moment, it is
evident that He is as truly omnipresent in essence as He is omniscient
in knowledge. For a mere creature cannot be in two places at once, or
act, at the same moment, in a great variety of ways in many lands. The
attempt of the Socinians to blunt the force of this consideration by
referring to Satan plucking away the seed sown in the heart of many
hearers of the gospel, is not analogous, because it involves a multitude
of evil spirits, and successive, not simultaneous action. To the other
attributes we need not advert.

​3. As to DIVINE WORSHIP paid to the Spirit, it is found in various
religious exercises. It is the more necessary to put this matter in the
proper light, because Arminian writers, with the concession too readily
evinced by them, were in the habit of asserting, along with those who
denied the doctrine of the Spirit, that we have neither example nor
command in Scripture for the worship of the Spirit. That statement is
groundless. Why it is not more frequently mentioned may, without
difficulty, be ascertained. One reason why the Spirit is not more
directly, as well as more frequently, addressed in prayer, is, that He
is THE PROMPTER OF PRAYER, and because no one can pray without the
surrender of the heart to Him, and without full dependence on His help
(Eom. viii. 26), who moulds within us the prayer which the Son presents.
But it is not true, in point of fact, that there is no example of prayer
to the Spirit. Of the texts which fully evince it, let me adduce the
ordinance of baptism per formed in the name of the Holy Ghost. We have
only to

1 He Uses the words : re TvttJux aurou Ifncri rt a-)-iot fnvfid,
TTfiffvirai Js ret

consider the nature of the ordinance to perceive in it a solemn act of
worship, an expression of faith, a testimony that He in whose name it is
performed is our God, with a heartfelt surrender to Him in an act of new
obedience. That all this is involved in it is clear from the words: "
Were ye baptized in the name of Paul?" (1 Cor. i. 13). That these three
Persons cannot be put in any other category than entire equality, is
obvious from the fact that if any one of them were not God, two
irreconcilable opposites would equally be the object of our faith, which
is impossible.

Another proof of the same thing is the invocation of grace from the
Spirit, as well as from the Father and from Christ (Eev. i. 4). The
words used are: " the seven Spirits which are before His throne;" but
the allusion is not to created spirits, but to the one Spirit of God,
described in the plural by the number SEVEN, to show the perfection of
the gifts, or to point out their sufficiency for the Church's necessity
and duties. That the reference is to the Spirit is clear, because Christ
is said to " have the seven Spirits of God" (Eev. iii. 1) ; and there is
no subordination in point of essential glory when He is equally invoked
as the fountain of divine communications.

Another consideration evincing the DIVINE HONOUR to be paid to Him is
derived from the declaration that the sin against the Holy Ghost can
never be forgiven. On the one hand, that could not be affirmed if He
were not God; and, on the other hand, it by no means implies a superi
ority to the other Persons from whom He is sent. It is to be explained
by the nature of the sin which rejects the testimony, or quenches the
operations of the Spirit, by w r hich alone men can be saved. The Holy
Spirit is never represented as a worshipper, but always as the object of
divine worship.

​4. THE CO-ORDINATE RANK in which the Spirit is placed with the Father
and the Son, is brought out in not a few

H

descriptive passages. We find them holding a co-ordinate rank when we
look at Christ's baptism (Matt. iii. 16), or at the Pentecostal effusion
of the Spirit (Acts ii. 33), or at the fact that by Christ we have
access in one Spirit to the Father (Eph. ii. 18). Without expounding all
these passages, and others in this connection, let me adduce the
apostolic benediction: " THE GRACE of the Lord Jesus Christ, and THE
LOVE OF GOD, AND THE COMMUNION [communication] OF THE HOLY GHOST be with
you all" (2 Cor. xiii. 14); words containing an invocation to all the
persons of the God head, and in point of import tantamount to saying: "
0 Lord Jesus Christ, let Thy grace; 0 Father, let Thy love ; O Holy
Ghost, let the communication of Thyself be with them all."

​5. The name of GOD is indirectly given to the Spirit. In the early
centuries, the opponents of the doctrine of the Spirit were wont to
challenge the orthodox Church, asking, Where is the Spirit designated
God ? Dr. Samuel Clarke was in the habit of affirming, according to his
Arian bias, that the Holy Ghost is never spoken of as God either in the
Old or New Testament. The language they desiderate may not be found in
the express form which they desire. But we find an ample use of divine
names applied to the Holy Spirit; and when we compare one passage with
another, and with the connections of the context in which they stand, no
possible doubt can remain on an unbiassed mind that the Spirit is
supreme God, having a divine personality of the same kind with that of
the Father and the Son, with whom He is named as of equal rank. It is
happily remarked by Lampe: " It is befitting that He who sjjcaks by all
the prophets and apostles, as His scribes and amanuenses, should speak
less of Himself, when the work abundantly commends the author;" a just
and happy observation, by no means to be neglected. But there are
express instances where He who is called THE HOLY GHOST in one clause is
called GOD in another. The narrative

of Ananias and Sapphira is of such a character (Acts v. 3, 4). If
Ananias lied to the Holy Ghost, and his culpability lay in the fact that
he lied not to man, but to God, it is very evident that in Peter's
account the Holy Ghost is God. (Compare similiar interchangeable
phraseology in Ps. xcv. 7 and Heb. iii. 7.)

THE WORK OF THE SPIRIT IX THE ANOINTING OF CHRIST.

O great thoughts confront us in reference to Christ throughout the Old
and New Testament—(1) that He is a DIVINE PERSON, and (2) THE ANOINTED
SERVANT OF THE LORD. On the one hand, the child born is designated and
accepted by the Church as the "Wonderful, Counsellor, THE MIGHTY GOD
(Isa. ix. 6); and, on the other hand, attention is turned to Him as the
Servant of the Lord upon whom the Spirit has been put (Isa. xlii. 1).
And these two thoughts, though distinctly apprehended, are never
disjoined in Biblical theology.

A twofold line of thought might here be pursued by us to show the
constant agency of the Spirit on Christ's humanity. (1) The idea of man
implies it (Gen. ii. 7); and (2) the great fact of the incarnation takes
for granted that Christ's man hood was immediately filled and led by the
Spirit. Many modern writers who deal with Christology, and write Lives
of Jesus, are wont to describe the Redeemer in glowin\^

o o

language as a man replenished with an absolute fulness of the
Spirit,—whatever meaning they may attach to that term, —but maintain for
the most part an ominous silence on His higher nature and on His divine
pre-existence as the second Person of the Trinity. But both thoughts
must be combined.

The passages which refer to the Spirit as anointing Christ are chiefly
given historically. The teaching of the Baptist on the anointing of the
Messiah is full of significance. It

uc,

WORK OF THE SPIRIT IN THE ANOINTING OF CHKIST. 11 7

gives conclusive evidence that the Baptist by no means taught, according
to the views largely adopted by writers of the Life of Jesus, that it
was the absolute fulness and presence of the Spirit which constituted
all the higher element that was in Christ, or that this was all that is
involved in what is called His incarnation.

It is worthy of notice that, prior to the mission of the Comforter to
act with convincing power on the world, Scrip ture speaks of a mission
of the Spirit conjoined with that of the Son. The Messiah is introduced
by the prophet Isaiah saying: " And now the Lord God has sent me and His
Spirit" (Isa. xlviii. 16) ; for, as Cocceius, Vitringa, and Lampe have
conclusively proved, the words should be so translated. They bring
before us a twofold or conjunct mission, which was appointed to take
place together. They set forth that the Spirit of God had a part to act
in and with the incar nation on the Person of the Messiah and in the
whole performance of His mediatorial work. We need not refer again to
the remarkable testimony of Isaiah to the anointing of Messiah by the
Spirit.

With regard to the incarnation, it was a conjunct act of the Trinity, in
which the Spirit is represented as preparing the body which the Son
assumed, by making it His own in a sense not to be affirmed of the other
Persons of the Godhead. Here I would make one preliminary remark. The
incarnation was among the category of MEANS to a given result, and
introduced by occasion of sin, which it was intended to put away. Many
among the scholastics repre sented the ultimate design of the
incarnation as the self-manifestation of the Son of God, thus making it
an object for Christ Himself, and sought for its own sake. But it is to
think unworthily of God to make it AN END.

Such a notion destroys the grace of the incarnation, and too readily
leads to the conclusion that it is of the nature of God to become
incarnate. Not less active in the same

118 . THE DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

direction is the modern theory of Dorner 1 and others, that the
incarnation was included in the eternal idea of the world, irrespective
of a fall. We cannot affirm that either the creation or incarnation was
necessary, or that they were anything beyond a free result of God's
will. Xo inner want was involved; it was only a self-moved act of love.
That the incarnation is but a MEANS to au end, not an ultimate object in
itself, is a position which must be held, if we would not open the way
for that style of speculation to which we have just adverted. Nothing
short of such means—for the incar nation was but a means, costly as it
was—could suffice to bring about the end designed. The problem was, How
could a guilty creature appear not guilty, and the partition-wall
erected by sin on the one side and justice on the other, be abolished,
that unimpeded love might flow forth, and man again be the temple of the
Holy Ghost ? The end contem plated was, how every attribute of God could
be magnified, all the persons of the Trinity equally honoured, and man's
wants so fully met, that from the broken fragments of the first vessel
another should be fashioned with still larger capacities of happiness
and glory.

For all His office the Lord Jesus received THE UNCTION OF THE SPIRIT :
and here a question has been raised: Are we to refer this unction to the
humanity of Christ or to the Person ? Theodoret, who too much betrays a
Nestorian bias, limited the unction to the humanity alone. 2 On the
other hand, Justin Martyr and Ambrose, not to mention others, refer the
expression UNCTION to the Deity of our Lord. Others, whom Petavius
adduces, refer it to both natures. Unquestionably, wherever allusion is
made to this unction, it must be under stood as referring to the Person.
The opinion that limits the unction to His humanity originated from the
circumstance

1 Dornor's Entwicldungsgescldchte der Ldire ron der Person Christi,
1845. 1 iwitQ\* 3\* oi\>% u; &\<os «xx' u; a.tfpu'roi (Epitom. dlv.
Dtcret. ch. 11). See Petavius, Tlteol. Do\<j. dt Incarnati, lib. xi. c.
8.

WORK OF THE SPIRIT IN THE ANOINTING OF CHRIST. 119

that the propounders of that view concluded—as was by no means
unnatural—that the expression could have no further allusion than to the
sanctification of our Lord's humanity at His nativity and baptism ; and
they did not duly attend to the wider acceptation of the phrase in
Scripture. The mode in which the Redeemer subsequently to His exaltation
received the promise of the Holy Ghost, together with the power of
dispensing such a gift to others, is of such a nature, however, as
conclusively proves that the unction is competent to Him only as God-man
l —that is, in both natures. As the humanity was assumed into the
hypostatic union, we may fitly say, on the one hand, that THE PERSON OF
CHRIST was anointed, so far as THE CALL TO OFFICE was concerned ; while
we bear in mind, on the other hand, that it is the humanity that is
anointed in as far as we contemplate the actual sup plies of gifts and
graces, aids and endowments, necessary for the execution of His office.

The unction to which we have referred did riot preclude, but presuppose
the knowledge of divine things involved in Christ's pre-existence, and
His divine fellowship with the Father before the world was. That was not
an ideal, but a real pre-exist ence, and included an immediate intuitive
knowledge of divine things. The Lord Jesus affirmed of Himself such
things as are not competent to any finite being when He said: " No man
hath ascended up to heaven but He that came down from heaven, the Son of
man who is in heaven " (John iii. 13). As our Lord existed from
eternity, and as an intimate relation obtained between Him and the
Father before the foundation of the world, His knowledge of divine
things was intuitive and absolutely perfect to such an extent that He
could say: " We speak what we know, and testify what we have seen "
(John iii. 11). He refers to Himself as participant of the divine

1 Maestriclit puts it happily thus: " Proinde unctus est quoad utramque
naturam, quatenus unctio designat vocationem; sed quoad humanam tantuin,
quatenus notat qualificationem " (Theor, Pract. Theol. p. 426).

counsels, and as being in heaven before He came down to earth. And the
additional clause: " the Son of man who is in heaven,"—which is not only
genuine, but essential to the sense,—describes, in contrast with the
clause: " no man ascended up to heaven," the sense in which He affirmed
that He testified what He had seen. With the omnipresence of the divine
nature He was in heaven while He spoke these words on the earth; for we
must by no means translate the words (6 wv) " who WAS in heaven," but "
who is in heaven."

The remark of Owen is worthy of deep consideration. " The only singular
immediate act," says he, 1 " of the Person of the Son on the human
nature, was the assumption of it into subsistence with Himself." That
mode of contemplating the Person of Christ is Biblical. But that we may
not be ingulfed in one-sidedness, it must be added that the Spirit,
according to the order of the Trinity, interposes His power only to
execute the will of the Son. 2 And so far is this from interfering with
the glory of the Son, that it rather reveals Him more conspicuously,
that in the work of redemp tion the operations of the Spirit are next in
order to those of the Son.

The two natures of our Lord actively concurred in every mediatorial act.
If He assumed human nature in the true and proper sense of the term into
union with His divine per son, that position must be maintained. The
Socinian objection, that there could be no further need for the Spirit's
agency, and, in fact, no room for it,—if the divine nature of our Lord
was itself active in the whole range of Christ's mediation,—is meant to
perplex the question, because these men deny the existence of any divine
nature in Christ's person. That style of reasoning is futile ; for the
question simply is, What do the Scriptures teach ? Do they affirm that
Christ was anointed \~by the Spirit (Acts x. 38) ? that He was led out
into the wilder-

1 Owen, vol. iii. p. 160, EJin. ed.

2 Vid. Lampe's excellent Disputationes Pliilol. Theol., de Spiritii
Sancio, vol. ii.

ness by the Spirit ? that He returned in the power of the Spirit to
begin His public ministry ? that He performed His miracles by the Spirit
? and that, previously to His ascension, He gave commandments by the
Spirit to the disciples whom He had chosen (Acts i. 2) ? No warrant
exists for anything akin to the depotentiation - theory which denudes
Him of essential attributes, and puts His humanity on a mere level with
that of other men; and as little warrant exists for denying the Spirit's
work on Christ's humanity in every mediatorial act, which He performed
on earth or performs in heaven.

The unction of the Spirit must be traced in all His personal and
official gifts. In Christ the Person and office coincided. In His divine
Person He was the substance of all the offices to which He was appointed
and fitted by the Holy Spirit to discharge. The offices would be nothing
apart from Himself, and could have neither coherence nor validity
without the underlying Person. But He was also anointed with the Spirit,
nay, the absolute receiver of the Spirit, poured on Him in such a
plenitude that it was not by measure (John iii. 34).

As to the UNCTION of the Lord Jesus by the Spirit, it was different
according to the THREE GRADES successively imparted. The first grade was
at the incarnation; the second coincided with His baptism; the third and
hiyhest grade was at the ascension, when He sat down on His mediatorial
throne and received from the Father the gift of the Holy Ghost to bestow
upon His Church in abundant measure.

I. The first grade of this anointing with the Spirit took place at the
incarnation or nativity. The words, as given by Luke, contain a brief
description of the supernatural concep tion : " The Holy Ghost shall
come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee:
wherefore that holy thing that shall be born of thee shall be called the
Son of God " (Luke i. 35). And they show that the Lord's humanity was
sinless, and that it never was in Adam's covenant. The

second clause describes more fully what was said in the first clause,
according to the exegetical rule, that in corresponding members of this
sort the darker is to be explained by the clearer. The import of both
clauses is, that the Holy Spirit was the former of Christ's human nature
; and that the Son, by assuming it into personal union, made it His own
by a right peculiar to Himself—that is, by a union personal and
incommunicable to the other Persons of the Godhead. 1 And these words
are important as serving to refute the ancient and recent Errorists, who
disliked the idea that our Lord's flesh was formed by the Spirit from
Mary's substance, and fancied to themselves a certain heavenly flesh
brought with Him from above.

Another point demanding notice is the statement that the holy thing born
of Mary should be called THE SON OF GOD. In construing this clause, we
must make " the holy thing born of thee " the nominative of the
sentence, and " shall be called Son of God " the predicate. They who 2
put the adjective HOLY as the predicate thus: " that which is to be born
shall be called holy," not only misapprehend the grammatical con
struction, but eliminate the truth which the clause was in tended to
convey. The true meaning is: the holy thing born of thee shall, in
virtue of the hypostatic union, be also called the Son of God, thus
asserting the unity of the Person. The words (Sto «at) intimate that
there is both an eternal generation and a holy thing begotten, created
when assumed, and assumed when created, and that the result is not two
Persons, but one; for the holy thing to which Mary gave birth is ALSO
called the Son of God.

1 It was united to Him in such a sense that it alto (\*«\<) is the Son
of God. That holy thing began to be at the conception by the Spirit. The
words of thee (i\* fou), deleted by many in the phrase, should probably
be retained in the text, for they are found in such a number of
Fathers—(Justin, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Athanasius, Chrysostom,
Epiphanius, Jerome)—that the balance of authority from this source alone
goes far to counterbalance the evidence of faulty manuscripts against
them.

2 So Bornemann and the revised version incorrectly.

This explanation meets the argument of the Unitarians, whose plea,
derived from this verse, is, that the future tense, " shall be called,"
implies that Christ was not the Son of God by eternal pre-existence, and
that He only began to be the Son of God when He took the flesh; thus
confounding the differ ence between His eternal Sonship and His being
called so in the knowledge and confession of the Church—that is, the dif
ference between being and manifestation. The nativity by the Holy Spirit
from the Virgin could not make humanity the Son of God. As the humanity,
however, was assumed into personal union by the Son, it also is called
the Son of God. Everything included in the Spirit's work on Christ's
humanity is of the last importance. Thus it is abundantly evident from
Scripture— unless we give an arbitrary meaning to the phrase : " The
Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
overshadow thee" (Luke i. 35)—that the Lord's humanity was produced by
the Holy Ghost in a supernatural way, which at once obviated the
possibility of contracting guilt from Adam, or of deriving any
transmitted corruption, and which, by an act of infinite wisdom and
power, put Him within the human family as a kinsman-Eedeemer, and yet
exempted Him from being in Adam's covenant; for He was the second Adam,
the Son of man.

Nor did the mother need an immaculate nature. The question, How could
pure humanity be derived from a defiled source which uniformly entails
corruption on others ? is a difficulty which has staggered many—the
Valentinians, the Anabaptists, the Quakers, and some modern Plymouthists
on the one side, and the entire Church of Home on the other. The sects
above named attempted to meet the difficulty by repre senting Mary as
but a pipe or channel (o-wXijv') through which a heavenly body or flesh,
immediately created by the Holy Ghost, but not formed from her
substance, was introduced into the world. But on that principle the Lord
Jesus would belong to another order of beings, and would not be our

Li-other, born into our family (Heb. ii. 14). And redemption was only
possible when effected by a GOEL or kinsman-Ifedeemer. As to the way in
which the Eomish Church met the difficulty in her last Council, the
presupposition (or, as theologians express it, the Trp&rov -v\^eOSo?)
from which she started can be no other than the repetition of the
exaggerated theory of Flacius on the subject of original sin, from which
the entire Protestant Church, Lutheran and Reformed, re coiled with
equal horror—viz. that sin had become the very essence of man. The
divines who confuted Flacius at once saw that on such a supposition an
incarnation would have been impossible, and replied that human nature,
corrupted as it was by the sin of Adam, was still, as a work of God,
good, and capable of redemption; that we can distinguish in idea between
the good work of God and the vitiating taint super induced upon it,
though \\ve cannot separate these elements; and that God can do
both—redeem His creature, and sepa rate the sin. On the ground of this
distinction, which is pre supposed in the whole redeeming and
regenerating grace of God, nature could be made available as the
substance out of which, by the miraculous intervention of the Holy
Ghost, the sinless humanity of our Lord could be produced. The theory of
Rome makes a sinless mother indispensable; and it is as faulty as that
of the above-named sects, which resorted in their perplexity to the
conclusion that Mary was but a medium of transmission. If both these
tendencies egregiously fail by regarding original sin as an insuperable
difficulty to the sup position that our Lord derived His flesh from a
fallen mother, Schleiermacher and his school, from antagonism to the
super natural in miracle, place themselves on a Pelagian view of
humanity, and concede that there was nothing more than the ordinary
generation. As to the theory of Menken and Irving, that our Lord took
fallen humanity, it wholly mistakes the great end of the supernatural
conception. According to the first promise given in Genesis (iii. 15),
and announced by

Isaiah a second time, the Saviour was to be born of a virgin (Isa. vii.
14). The Holy Spirit was upon Him, accordingly, from the moment of His
conception, displaying His power in supplying Him with the endowments,
capacities, and gifts— physical, intellectual, and spiritual—which were
necessary for His high work. As sanctification belongs to the Spirit's
operations, there can be no doubt that everything required for the
sanctification of the Lord's humanity was plentifully sup plied by the
agency of the Holy Spirit, who warded off every taint from whatever
quarter it could possibly approach Him. Not only so ; the soul of
Christ, from the first moment of con scious existence, was filled with
actual communications of the Spirit for such exercises of trust, and
love, and holy affections as were necessary in the experience of Him who
came as the second Adam, with the image of God restored in all its
fulness (Ps. xxii. 10). He who made man a temple of God at first, and
who was restoring it in the Incarnate Son, was incessantly active in
conferring every conceivable gift, and in signally augmenting these
gifts in ever-increasing measure at successive stages for the great work
to be performed. All this was for His private life.

" And the child grew and waxed strong in Spirit ('jrvev\^ari}}, filled
with wisdom" (Luke ii. 40). This passage proves that we must ascribe to
the Spirit all the progress in Christ's mental and spiritual
development, and all His advancement in knowledge and holiness. He went
through the successive stages of acquirement in a manner absolutely
unique, because His humanity had its existence in the personal union. He
was filled by the Spirit with a wisdom which replenished all the powers
of His rational nature. Though the increase, at first sight, seems
incompatible with His being the Son of God, yet perfection is compatible
with progress in a created nature, and He must needs be made like to His
brethren. He knew as a boy what He had not acquired as a child; and as
all the

1 This reading has a preponderance of authority in its favour.

gifts were supplied to Him by the Spirit, we can trace the following
stages which come to light in our Lord's history. The Spirit was given
to Him, in consequence of the personal union, in a measure which no mere
man could possess, con stituting the link between the Deity and
humanity, perpetu ally imparting the full consciousness of His
personality, and making Him inwardly aware of His divine Sonship at all
times (Luke ii. 49).

Thus the Spirit at the incarnation became the great guiding principle of
all Christ's earthly history, according to the order of operation that
belongs to the Trinity. It was the Holy Spirit that formed His human
nature and directed the tenor of His earthly life. His human nature had
no distinct per sonality, nor any self-directing principle (TO
\^ye/zoi\^/coz/), apart from the personal union; and as He was not less
perfect, but more perfect than any other of the family of man on this
account, it must be carefully remembered that the full con sciousness
that He was the only Son of God, who came from God and went to God (John
xiii. 3), flowed perpetually from the Spirit. The communication from the
one nature to the other was \~by the Spirit, the EXECUTIVE of all the
works of God. Hence He never spoke or acted but at the proper time (John
vii. 6). He had His hour for everything that He per formed, and a full
consciousness derived from the Spirit that He was the Son of God. The
Godhead dwelling in Him made all due communications to His manhood by
the Holy Ghost. All the evangelists, but especially the Gospel of John,
show that the Spirit prompted all His actions, and gave direction to all
His words. Nothing was undertaken but by the Spirit's direction; nothing
spoken but by His guidance; nothing executed but by His power. This
anointing with the Spirit, foretold in prophecy and accomplished in
fact, may be traced in all His official words and deeds. The personal
life of Christ as the God-man full of the Spirit, was the natural basis
of all His official activity.

WORK OF THE SPIRIT IN THE ANOINTING OF CHRIST. 127

​II. THE SECOND GRADE of the donation or unction of the Holy Spirit was
at His BAPTISM. Before Jesus appeared invested with His PUBLIC OFFICE,
the Holy Spirit had formed the human nature, and replenished it with
perfect wisdom and faultless holiness; and the baptism, AS THE PUBLIC IN
AUGURATION of the Lord Jesus INTO His OFFICE, was the occasion of
conferring the supernatural gifts which had been promised in Old
Testament prophecy. The evidence of His inauguration was furnished by
the Baptist, the voice crying in the wilderness,—that is, the voice of
the law and the prophets,—and by the visible descent of the Holy Spirit.
The Baptist had a divine revelation that the Messiah should be pointed
out to him by the visible descent of the Holy Spirit resting and abiding
upon Him (John i. 33). If he supposed that the Messiah should appear
after the stern and vehement manner in which the Old Testament prophets
pre sented themselves, he was to learn that God had chosen another way.
The Messiah came among others to be bap tized, and when He was baptized,
the Spirit, like a dove, the emblem of gentleness, purity, and love,
descended upon Him from the open heaven, and rested or abode upon Him.

This descent of the Spirit was intended to confirm and encourage the
Lord Jesus before entering on His arduous work; and it took place in
that public concourse of people which assembled to hear the Baptist, and
became the occasion of His public introduction into office. On this
august occa sion all the Persons of the Trinity were distinctly
manifested —the Father revealing Himself by an audible voice, the Son
appearing in the flesh which He assumed, the Holy Spirit descending in a
bodily shape like a dove. The anointer was the Father, the anointed was
the Son, the unction, or anointing oil (Ps. xlv. 7), was the Holy Ghost,
a divine Person of equal rank. It was not beneath the dignity of the
Holy Spirit at the inauguration of the Messiah—whose office implies the
reception of the Spirit not by measure (John iii. 34), and

the dignity of receiving authority to dispense that Spirit to others—to
make use of that visible emblem to accredit the great fact, and to bear
testimony to it. Enough for us that it occurred. We are not warranted in
the case of every Biblical narrative to demand an answer to the
question, Why was this ? The abiding of the dove on Jesus, or the
appearance of a dove, indicated that the Spirit of the Lord now RESTED
upon Him (Isa. xi. 2). To the same purpose Peter said : " God anointed
Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power" (Acts x. 38).

Thus the unction for the office of MESSIAH or CHRIST is seen in the
sinless nature and endowments of every kind that qualified Him for His
task (Isa. xlii. 1-4, xlix. 1, 2). The full supply of the Spirit with
which the Son was replenished from His nativity, was shadowed forth by
many anointings instituted in the typical services of Israel, especially
in the appointments to the three principal functions—prophet, priest,
and king (Isa. Ixi. 1 ; Ps. xlv. 8). There was, in the Lord's human
life, a combination of all the graces that seem the most
opposite,—meekness and boldness, the assertion of truth and deep
humility, greatness and gentleness,—nay, the scat tered beauties of all
the saints jointly found in Him. The expression: " the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus," unfolds to us the source of all His actions, and
demonstrates that more habitual grace dwelt in Him than in all created
beings. The Baptist therefore declared: " God giveth not the Spirit by
measure to Him" (John iii. 34); for though the words "to Him" are not in
the original Greek, they are undoubtedly implied, as will appear from
the following reasons :—(1) The passage cannot be generalized into an
allusion that shall take in the Church. It is a very forced
interpretation that would refer it to the general outpouring of the
Spirit on the Church, —a comment for which the context supplies no
warrant. Moreover, (2) the expression GIVETH THE SPIRIT, in the present
tense, is there used in connection with the fact, and

WORK OF THE SPIRIT IN THE ANOINTING OF CHRIST. 129

is the reason of the fact, that Jesus " speaketh the words of God," but
is not in connection with the authority subse quently conferred of
giving the Spirit to others.

If it is asked: "What need had He of the divine teaching of the Holy
Spirit when He had known the heavenly Father from eternity ? the answer
is: The Son of God, as such, needed no further teaching as to divine
things. But as it behoved Him to be man, to be made like to His
brethren, and to occupy the servant's place as the one Mediator between
God and man, He NEEDED THAT UNCTION with which He was supplied. The
Socinians, who will have it that whatever higher knowledge of divine
things was in Jesus was obtained at His baptism, put the two statements
in antagonism to each other. But they are in perfect harmony.

That unction with the Spirit which preceded Christ's mira culous
activity when He began to go about doing good, was bestowed on the
occasion when He came to receive baptism, and to be publicly inaugurated
into His Messianic office. The Spirit descended upon Him and abode on
Him in such fulness that He could communicate His miraculous power to
His friends, which no mere prophet could ever perform (John i. 33 ;
Matt. iii. 11). He was anointed to be the supreme Prophet (Matt. xvi. 2
0); \* and as the prophets had immediate revelations when the Spirit of
God came upon them, the same thing held true of Him, but with this
marked pecu liarity, that the Spirit did not occasionally reveal the
will of God as in their case, but evermore permanently dwelt in Him to
reveal the divine mind, and make Him conscious of His own Sonship.

The visible descent of the Holy Spirit, not only for the sake of the
Jews and of the Baptist, but for a testimony to Christ Himself (Matt.
iii. 16), took place while Jesus was praying to the Father, probably
with a view to obtain the Spirit, which had long before been promised by
the prophets (Luke iii. 21).

As to the object designed to be served by the descent of the Holy
Spirit, it showed that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah promised to the
Fathers, and that He was filled with the Spirit, which, on the one hand,
would fit Him for the execution of His high office; and, on the other
hand, enable Him, when His work was accomplished, to disjjcnse the
Spirit to His people without let or hindrance; for the Spirit is the
efficient cause of all His divine operations outward to the Church and
to the world. The operations of the Son of God upon His human nature
were effected by the Holy Spirit, as the immediate efficient cause of
its existence, and of its fitness for the accomplishment of the great
work for which the Son of God had assumed human nature.

The Spirit given at the baptism was intended to equip Him for the
execution of His mediatorial office, as Prophet, Priest, and King. That
the Spirit qualified Him for His prophetic priestly and kingly offices
is evident, because, with a full consciousness of His divine Sonship
perpetually awakened and sustained by the Holy Spirit, He (1) not only
spoke the words of God, but (2) offered Himself without spot to God, and
(3) draws all His people to Himself by the constant aid of the eternal
Spirit.

Is it strange that He should be under the guidance of the Spirit which
He gives to others ? Tin's will not appear strange when we call to mind
that lie was man, and that His human nature without a separate
personality of its own had its activity only in personal union with the
Son of God, who, though neither depotentiated, nor holding any of His
divine perfections in abeyance, acted on the human nature, in every
mediatorial act, ly the power of the Holy Spirit. The divine nature did
not absorb the human nature in any of its functions. Both natures were
perfectly distinct, but united in the one Person. The light of Christ's
understanding, the holy purity and the unswerving obedience of His will,
the exercise of all His faculties and powers in religious things,

were due to the immediate guidance of the Holy Spirit of God, giving Him
the full consciousness that He was the eternal Son, and authority to act
as such.

The next fact in Christ's life was THE TEMPTATION, of which it is said
that He was led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted
(Matt. iv. 1). The human nature was confirmed by the Spirit, and made
victorious at every point of assault by the sustaining power of the Holy
Spirit.

And when the temptation was ended, it is said: " Jesus returned in the
poiver of the Spirit into Galilee" (Luke iv. 14), to begin a ministry of
power. Coming from the scenes of the temptation with a victory which
gave Him the right of con quest, He, with an absolute plenitude of the
Spirit, began to call disciples to Him, partly as trophies of His
victory, partly as office-bearers in the kingdom which He was warranted
to erect on the ruins of Satan's kingdom, which had already sustained a
reverse. Every converted soul was a new prey taken from the adversary by
the HOLY SPIRIT, on the ground of the meritorious obedience, which was
accepted as perfect, at the point where the battle was lost by the first
man. Jesus had authority to take the first steps for setting up His
kingdom.

Another memorable fact was the sermon preached in the synagogue of
Nazareth, where He was well known (Luke iv. 17). Having read the words
of the prophet Isaiah, which are expressly put into the mouth of the
Messiah,—" The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because He hath anointed
me to preach " (Isa. Ixi. 1),—He expounded it, and added: " This day is
this Scripture fulfilled in your ears." The doctrines which He uttered
exhibited the unction to which the pro phecy referred, and His townsmen
wondered at the gracious words (rot? XOYCW TT}? \^ap/ro?) which
proceeded out of His mouth, as He spoke by the Spirit which anointed
Him.

The next fact which discovers that He acted by the Spirit, was the
CASTING OUT OF SATAN. " If I cast out devils BY THE SPIRIT OF GOD, then
the kingdom of God is come to you"

(Matt. xii. 28). The Lord Jesus was then face to face with Satan's
kingdom, and was setting up the kingdom of God. This was not the general
dominion over the world. It was that kingdom referred to in the first
promise, where it was said that the seed of the woman should bruise the
serpent's head. By the Spirit of God which rested on Him, He was able to
work miracles in general, and to cast out Satan in particular from his
fortress in the human heart; thus show ing an authority and a miraculous
power which sufficiently attested that the King of a new kingdom was on
the scene, and had begun His sway over those who are born of the Spirit.
The Holy Spirit was for a time shut up and limited to Christ's own
Person. But when the atonement was con summated, the life-principle of
His own Person was also to be that of His kingdom.

I next refer to the Spirit's work in connection with Christ's priestly
oblation : " Wlto, through the eternal Spirit, offered Himself without
spot to God" (Heb. ix. 14). The expression: '•' the eternal Spirit," can
only mean the Holy Spirit according to the usual acceptation of the
term,—not the divine nature of Christ, as too many expositors have
understood it. The meaning is, that the Son of God, moved and animated
by the Holy Ghost, offered Himself without spot as an atoning sacrifice.
The Spirit rendered Him an unspotted sacrifice. The Spirit discovered to
Him the inflexible claims of God as well as inflamed Him with such love
to man and zeal for God as prompted Him to go forward in spite of every
hindrance, pain, and difficulty, to effect the world's redemp tion, and
thus fitted Him as man for His work. The Holy Spirit, in a word, filled
His mind with the unflagging ardour, zeal, and love which led Him to
complete the sacrifice.

To explain the text as if it described the divine nature as priest and
the human nature as the sacrifice, is inadmissible. The WHOLE PERSON is
priest and victim; for all done by either nature belongs to the Person :
HE offered HIMSELF,

WORK OF THE SPIRIT IN THE ANOINTING OF CHRIST. 133

says the apostle. In this view of the matter, it would be a mere
tautology—if the eternal Spirit is interpreted of the divine nature—to
say He offered Himself through the divine nature. It would on that
principle be but a repetition of the same thing. If we take it, however,
as intimating the action of the Holy Spirit, it will vividly represent
the holy fire by which the sacrifices were consumed. One does not find,
except on this interpretation, anything in the sacrifice of Christ that
could be adduced as the antitype of the holy fire employed in the
sacrifice. Nor are the objections to the view which we have propounded
of any weight. When it is objected that the Holy Spirit was not the
Priest who offered the sacrifice, the obvious answer is that Christ as
Priest offered Himself a sacrifice possessed of infinite value and
excellence in consideration of His divine Person, and of the additional
fact that it was unspotted and offered through the Holy Spirit. Because
the Spirit was in Him as a Spirit of faith and zeal and love, the
Eedeemer took upon Him with the utmost alacrity all that was to be
performed and endured for man's redemption.

The Holy Spirit, which framed the Redeemer's mind as well as body,
perpetually rested upon Him during all His earthly sojourn, imparting to
Him the full consciousness of His Sonship in the highest sense, and
prompting Him to execute the mediatorial work imposed on Him (Isa. xlii.
1-4). That our Saviour was also raised from the dead by the Holy Ghost,
is clearly taught by Peter, when he affirms that He was put to death in
the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit (1 Pet. iii. 18).

​III. The THIRD DEGREE of Christ's unction, reserved for His exaltation,
is thus described : " Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted,
and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, He hath
shed forth this which ye now see and hear" (Acts ii. 33). This third

degree of unction to which reference is made in the Psalms (Ps. ii. G,
xlv. 7), and which became apparent at Pentecost, was an ascension-gift,
the description of which by Peter is but a paraphrase of the words : "
Thou hast ascended on high; Thou hast led captivity captive; Thou hast
received gifts for men" (Ps. Ixviii. 18). That supply of the Spirit was
meant for the Church to be erected and organized; and it was fitly
bestowed after the ascension on those for whom the Spirit was purchased
as well as destined.

When we follow the sequence of events on the day of Pentecost, we see
the Spirit acting in a twofold way—as the Spirit of conviction and as
the Spirit of adoption. lie con • vinccd the multitude of their sin and
guilt, that they might seek repentance and forgiveness. To minds
penitent and receiving baptism for the remission of sins, lie was
further promised as the Spirit of adoption: " Ye shall receive the gift
of the Holy Ghost" (Acts ii. 38). The order of salvation is repentance,
forgiveness, and then the inhabitation of the Holy Ghost as the Spirit
of adoption.

We are brought to the ACTUAL MISSION of the Comforter. Previous to His
resurrection Christ had been the receiver of the Spirit, and the Spirit
was mainly limited to Christ's own Person. With His resurrection the day
came when He showed that the great result of His atoning death was the
power of bestowing the Spirit upon others, a blessing so momentous that
it may be described as that in which all other blessings are included.
This is the grandest display of Christ's exaltation—the culminating
point,—arguing at once reward and divine dignity. Fur no mere servant
could occupy the position of conferring upon others the gift of the
Spirit, who is a divine Person. He only who had put away sin by the
sacrifice of Himself, and who had the Spirit to bestow, could exercise
the authority of sending Him. The Spirit was given by the risen Christ
to equip His ministers and to be the all-directing as well as
sanctifying power in

WORK OF THE SPIRIT IN THE ANOINTING OF CHRIST. 135

the kingdom of heaven which was now set up, as had been expressly
promised by the Old Testament prophets and by the Lord Himself (Ps.
Ixviii. 19 ; John xiv. 16).

As Mediator, the Lord Jesus was anointed with the Holy Spirit for the
execution of all His offices and for the per formance of all His work.
The RIGHT TO SEND THE SPIRIT into the hearts of fallen men was acquired
by atonement. Many, indeed, had been saved in virtue of His covenant
engagement from the day of the first promise. The opera tions of the
Spirit in every epoch presuppose the vicarious sacrifice, on which
depends the right of giving the Holy Spirit in any case : " He redeemed
us that ("vaj we might receive the promise of the Spirit by faith "
(Gal. iii. 14). The promised Spirit followed the cancelling of the curse
as the effect the cause. Countless multitudes had been saved on the
ground of the coming sacrifice, but the precision of the language which
connects the gift of the Spirit with the finished work of Christ is
never forgotten, and the Holy Spirit was never spoken of as SENT while
the old economy stood.

The Holy Ghost, supplying His humanity with light and strength for His
mediatorial work, was, according to the divine order, only carrying out
the will of the Son, and interposing His power to execute the
intimations of the Son. The Spirit's operations revealed the will and
purpose of the Son.

The WORKING OF MIRACLES was also from the Holy Spirit, though the
authority flowed from Christ Himself. The Holy Spirit is described as
acting in Christ's prophetical office in the same way as in the apostles
and prophets. He per formed miracles: He showed that the kingdom of God
was come. The distinction which Peter employs when he uses the
expression: " anointed with the Holy Ghost and with power," may refer to
both gifts—to the sanctifying as well as to the miraculous works (Acts
x. 38).

From the statements referring to Christ's unction for all His offices,
it sometimes appears as if He were in the sub ordinate position of
needing direction, aid, and miraculous power for the purposes of His
mission; at other times He is said to GIVE THE SPIRIT and to SEND THE
SPIRIT, as if the Spirit's operations were subordinated to the Son. It
is, however, evident from the whole tenor of Scripture that there was a
conjoined mission in which the Son and Spirit acted together for man's
restoration, according to the order of operation in the Trinity.

LECTUEE III.

THE WORK OF THE SPIRIT IN THE INSPIRATION OF PROPHETS AND APOSTLES.

TN the Old and New Testament we find two kinds of gifts, -\*- dividing
the community into two classes. We find (1) the ordinary saving gifts in
the religious body, or people of God: (2) the extraordinary gifts for
official service. The latter created duties rather than dignities; and
the authority conferred on their possessors was only a further
obligation. They were the necessary endowments for qualifying office
bearers called to administer the covenant, and in whom God spoke (Heb.
i. 1).

It may be proper to show that they were gifts intended to fit men for
office; that they were but temporary; and that they were conspicuously
displayed, now here and now there.

Extraordinary gifts were given from the earliest times to the recipients
of the divine oracles, first to Moses, through whom the law was given,
and then to the cycle of prophets who spoke the word of God to their own
generation, or wrote it, by divine command, for all coming times. These
gifts were intended to show men generally, that in receiving their word
as a divine message, they were not misled by cunningly devised fables.
The Spirit is referred to as the author of these supernatural gifts
(Heb. ii. 4); and they ceased wjien no longer needed for the great end
which they were intended to subserve.

​1. As to prophecy, it was not, as some will have it, mere religious
enthusiasm, or the exaltation of the religious senti ment. Though
Abraham is called a prophet (Gen. xx. 7), and all by whom the Spirit
uttered a divine communication, we find it was specially from the time
of Samuel that a series of PROPHETS, with a commission supernaturally
accredited, appeared in succession, down to the time of Malachi, to
recall Israel to their law,—to reprove the nation's vices, to declare
the divine judgments,—and to proclaim the greatest events in the world's
history—the incarnation, atonement, and gracious reign of the Messiah.
This gift of prophecy was the chief gift of Old Testament times; and an
act of divine immediate intervention conveyed that gift to those who
were invested with it.

The Holy Spirit is referred to as THE SPIRIT OF PROPHECY in that very
variously expounded passage of the Apocalypse : »} \<yap fiaprvpia rov
'I\^crou e'crrt TO irvevpa TJ}? Trpcxfirjreia 1 ? : " the testimony of
Jesus is the Spirit of prophecy " (llev. xix. 10); the meaning of which
appears not so much in the order of the words given in the Authorized
Version, as in their trans position, which the Greek warrants and the
sense demands, thus: " the Spirit of prophecy is the testimony of
Jesus." ' The expression: " the Spirit of prophecy," according to the
uniform nsage where a genitive follows the term Spirit, intimates that
the Spirit spoke in all the prophets ; and the import of the clause is,
that the scope or aim of all prophecy was to testify of Jesus (John xv.
2G, v. 39).

The nature of the Spirit's operation on the prophet's mind is explained
by Peter when he thus declares, in full harmony with all that the
historic outline of the Old Testament narrative contains: " No prophecy
of the Scripture was of any private excitation (tVtXucrew\*,); but holy
men of God spoke as

1 See to this effect a dissertation by Stade, published under the
auspices of Mosheim, de Spiritn Prophetlae de Christo testante, 1734.
The purport of the verse is thus put: " ita ego quo\^ne jussus sum
testeni Christ! agerc."

they were moved by the Holy Ghost" (2 Pet. i. 21). The antithesis
intended to be conveyed by the two clauses is, no private impulse, but a
moving influence of the Spirit. The allusion of the words, though
variously interpreted, seems to be to the mission of the prophets, to
the removal of the barriers or the opening of the lists when they
started on their race ; for they ran only when the Spirit sent them
(Jer. xxiii. 21). They remained silent till they received the Spirit's
communi cation, or the unmistakable impulse of the Spirit (Jer. xx. 17);
in other words, they did not start till the lists were opened, and they
were told to run. The Spirit did not give them this gift as a permanent
habit, or so much reserved wealth from which they could draw at their
discretion. He gave them light and divine communications for the
official purpose which all inspiration subserved at certain times, and
so moved them that they could not but speak or write what the Spirit
enjoined them to declare. The prophetic Spirit imparted a supernatural
illumination in virtue of which they understood fully what they were
commissioned to announce,— whether things past, present, or to
come,—beyond the range of the unaided human faculties. As to the mode of
communi cation to the human mind, whether given by dream, vision, or
ecstasy, we should not attempt to scrutinize it, partly because we have
had no experience of the thing, partly because our faculties are not
commensurate to the task.

​2. The supernatural gifts in the New Testament Church were very
abundant, but all culminated in THE APOSTLES, who were the organs of
Christ's revelation to the Church, and invested with an ecumenical
commission which extended to all lands, and which endures through all
time. The Church is built on the apostles, and will continue to stand on
that foundation till the second advent. As to those supernatural gifts
which the Spirit thus dispensed in the apostolic Churches in the most
ample fulness, according to His will, even beyond the circle of the
apostles, we find that to one He

gave the gift of knowledge, to another the gift of healing, to another
the working of miracles, to another prophecy, and the like. These gifts
were limited to individuals, and not universal; they were temporary, so
that one might possess them to-day and want them to-morrow; and they
were by no means co-extensive with the possession of divine grace. That
rich supply of supernatural or miraculous gifts with which the apostolic
Churches were adorned, was a standing pledge and sign that the inward
miracle of inspiration continued. The cessation of these gifts, after
they had served their purpose, was a significant fact. But during the
whole time of their continuance, these miraculous gifts, and especially
the gift of tongues,—that is, the gift of speaking in languages which
had never been learned,—were a conclusive proof and illustration of the
miracle of inspiration.

These extraordinary gifts of the Spirit were no longer needed when the
canon of Scripture was closed. Up to that time they were an absolute
necessity. They are now no longer so. Nor is the Church warranted to
expect their restoration, or to desire prophetic visions, immediate
revela tions, or miraculous gifts, either in public or in private,
beyond, or besides, the all-perfect canon of Scripture. The Church of
Home, which still claims these extraordinary gifts, is to that extent
injurious to the Spirit as the author of Scripture. And enthusiastic
sects l that cherish the belief of their restoration, or an expectation
to that effect, have not learned or duly pondered how great a work of
the Spirit has been completed and provided for the Church of all times
in the gift of the Holy Scriptures.

When they began to be abused for purposes of display on the one side, or
envy on the other, they were put in a secondary place ; and a more
excellent way presented to men's attention. Then the saving
graces—faith, hope, love—were

1 E.rj. The Montanists of the second century and the Irvingites of the
nineteenth century.

so preferred as to eclipse the most imposing extraordinary gifts (1 Cor.
xii. 31 ff.). The inestimable blessings of regene rating grace, and of
true spiritual life, were set forth as of paramount value far beyond all
the transitory gifts.

The presence of miraculous gifts in both dispensations served a twofold
purpose. They were (1) an indubitable proof of a supernatural revelation
from God to man in general (Heb. ii. 4); (2) they were a reliable pledge
as well as elucidation of the inward miracle of inspiration. The man who
possessed them, that is, who was invested with what was in its own
nature miraculous, and who gave evidence that he could at proper seasons
reveal the future, was entitled with authority to say : " Thus saith the
Lord."

When it is alleged that the restoration of these gifts is not an
unwarrantable expectation, the answer is, they are no longer required.
The closing of the canon has superseded their necessity and value,
inasmuch as the Church possesses in the Scriptures all that they were
intended to accredit and commend. Beyond the written word which was
completed before the apostles passed away, the Spirit has no further
revelations or immediate communications of the divine will to impart.
The extraordinary gifts, limited as they were to the primitive Church,
wholly passed away, because they were no longer necessary.

When it is argued that they have been lost by the Church's fault, and
that they would be restored to the be lieving expectation of the
Church,—if she had faith to wait for them in prayer,—the answer is, that
the prophecy of Joel was fulfilled at Pentecost and during the apostolic
age. To the allegation that these gifts ought still to be possessed, we
reply by denying the supposition that the miraculous gifts were to
continue. What would they accredit if the canon is closed ? Had they
been intended as a part of the Church's chartered rights, they would not
have been withheld for nearly two thousand years. The link with a
miraculous past

would have been kept up. But they had served their purpose.

The proposition which I shall here endeavour to set forth and vindicate
is the following : The Holy Spirit supplied prophets and apostles, as
chosen organs, with gifts which must be distinguished from ordinary
grace, to give forth in human forms of speech a revelation which must be
accepted as the word of God in its whole contents, and as the
authoritative guide for doctrine and duty.

This proposition I will now assert and elucidate. But let me at the
outset obviate a difficulty as to the order in which we take up the
question. It has been objected by certain writers that we reason in a
circle here, first proving the truth of Scripture by its unerring
inspiration, and then establishing inspiration by Scripture. It is not
so. We proceed by a strictly inductive method. In the whole argu ment,
which goes to establish the fact of a divine revelation as well as the
genuineness, authenticity, and canonical autho rity of Scripture,
nothing is assumed. We neither forestall historic proof nor dispense
with rational evidence. All this is completed before the question of
inspiration is even taken into consideration. It is only when these
points have been conclusively proved and established that we interrogate
the books committed to the Church as the oracles of God on the question
of their higher origin. The evidence from MIRACLES and PROPHECY, which
accredits a divine commission, accredits also the inspiration to which
the apostles laid claim.

As to the credentials supplied by MIRACLES, wrought as they were by the
same Spirit who is the Spirit of revelation and the Spirit of prophecy,
it must be held that the miracles performed by Moses, by the prophets,
and by the apostles, furnish undeniable evidence that they spoke and
wrote by divine inspiration. It is a first principle to which no valid
exception can be taken, that the Holy Spirit, the divine author of all
miracles, will by no means give countenance to

an impostor, or give a divine sanction to falsehood. The Deists and
sceptics generally are so well aware of this, that they have left no
means untried to invalidate this proof. As it would carry us away from
our subject to enter into this topic at large, I shall only touch its
salient point. Whether miracles prove a commission to reveal a divine
message and the truth of the doctrine IMMEDIATELY or MEDIATELY, has been
debated with much acuteness. I unhesitatingly attach myself to the view
which asserts that miracles immediately prove the truth of the doctrine
and the inspiration of the messenger.

If, therefore, any one declared, as Moses and the prophets did in the
Old Testament, and as Christ and His apostles in the New Testament, that
he was divinely commissioned and performed miracles in attestation of
his doctrine, the acceptance of their testimony with unhesitating
confidence was only a compliance with divine authority. They were organs
of a heaven-attested revelation, speaking and writing with divine
inspiration; for God evidently spoke in them (Heb. i. 1). They who
attempt, as many now attempt in a more open or more modified way, to
expel the miracles from Scripture, are virtually endeavouring—whether
they con sciously mean it or not—to make the writers false witnesses,
and to undermine all certainty.

Another test of not less validity than the former is the evidence
derived from PROPHECY, which is A MIRACLE OF KNOWLEDGE as the other is
of power. The great test of a true prophet was that the prediction came
to pass (Deut. xviii. 22). As this test, however, could not be applied
by his contemporaries, if the matter were remote, we find that those
credentials which established him as a prophet of the Lord were based on
the fulfilment of things which could be known by experience. In proof of
this we have only to recall the predictions of Moses, Samuel, Elijah,
and Elisha in reference to things near at hand, and verified before the
eyes of their contemporaries. We have only to recall such

near predictions as Micaiah's (1 Kings xxii. 28) or Isaiah's (Isa. vii.
4, xxxvii. 34) ; and when they were summoned to write, so vividly had
all been presented to their minds, and so accurately had all been
retained in their memory, that we find a Jeremiah, at the end of twenty
years, making the selection of the matter and digesting it into form by
the Spirit's guidance in a manner succinct enough to prevent the book
from exceeding reasonable bounds, and we must clearly hold that thoughts
and words were, as it were, fused and molten together or formed and
shaped together (Jer. xxxvi. 32).

As for the apostles in the New Testament, it is only necessary to recall
their opportunities and the terms of their commission, to see that they
were armed with historic information obtained in the Lord's immediate
presence, and subsequently brought back, as occasion required, to their
remembrance by the Holy Spirit, who also furnished the communication of
new truths, which were supernaturally imparted as the necessities of the
Church required. Their authority, accordingly, was the same with that of
Christ, because He took all the responsibility of their official
teaching upon Himself, when He said: " He that heareth you heareth me "
(Matt. x. 40).

It is important to keep in mind, that while the Holy Spirit is the
author of supernatural revelation with all its accompaniments, adjuncts,
and evidences, there are two aspects of the question—one IN FACT and one
IN WORD. The former is the objective manifestation of the Son of God ;
the latter is the written word prepared by men whom the Spirit specially
called and endowed. THE PERSONAL SELF-MANIFESTATION preceded ; the
WRITTEN WORD followed. The former conveyed the revelation to the minds
of prophets and apostles; the latter conveyed it in appropriate terms
from their minds to the Church at large, securing for it such a safe
communication as became the oracles of God.

1 See Studlen und Kritiktn for 1861, H. 1.

Both operations were from the Holy Spirit. Eevelation always existed IN
GREAT FACTS, with an appended explanation in spoken or written words. In
these facts we find the various attributes of God and the aspects of His
moral government exhibited to the faith of the Church and for the
enlargement of her knowledge. And THE REVELATION OF WORD showed how the
facts answered this purpose. Eevelation of fact and revelation of word,
emanating from one and the same Spirit of God, were conjoined from the
beginning. From the time of the fall, the types and pro
phecies—foreshadowing and predicting the great sacrifice— opened up a
revelation of fact in due time to be accom plished, of which also a
thousand deliverances in the history of the Church were the pledges. To
this revelation of fact the patriarchs looked forward, just as we look
back to the accomplished reality. In the New Testament the revelation is
embodied in the historic facts of the incarnation, atone ment, and
resurrection of Christ, and in the perfect narrative or record of these
facts in the written word.

Of this written revelation the Holy Spirit is the author. The fact that
the personal Spirit not only conveyed the truth to the writer's mind,
but found adequate expression for it, involved a certain limitation or
abasement in con descending to speak in human forms of speech. We may
not unfitly say that, as God is said to humble Himself to behold the
things that are in the earth (Ps. cxiii. 6), and as the Son humbled
Himself when He became obedient to death (Phil. ii. 8), so the Holy
Spirit abases Himself in giving His message, however lofty the matter,
in a form of speech, which often resembles a mother's accommodation to
the capacity of an infant. And this was necessary in order that the
written word might, without constraint or difficulty, pass into the
articulate speech and the written language of every nation on the
surface of the globe.

I have referred to divine fact as underlying the inspired

K

word, because the principal argument at present urged against
inspiration—as is well known to those who know German theology—is, that
the revelation is not in the documents or in the written word at all. It
is argued that the latter are mere literary productions, composed under
the same conditions w r ith ordinary writings, or differing from them
only in the circumstance that the writers were holier men ; and hence
they have no reserve or fear in permitting any liberty to be taken with
the Scriptures. They fall back on the fact. They say the revelation of
fact is secure. This mediating theology, which took its rise from
Schleiermacher, and has been represented on this point by Tholuck,
Rothe, and the great body of German divines, allows a revelation in
historic facts, but denies the Biblical revelation in any true accepta
tion of the term. In a word, the historic revelation of fact is isolated
from the book-Revelation. The books, according to them, are no more than
any other narrative digested by pious men—mere literary productions
having no supernatural origin whatever. The revelation, according to
this theory, is not in the records at all, which, in fact, are correct
and trust worthy just in proportion as the writers had access or had not
to reliable information, and who are by no means supposed to be exempt
from the infirmities, mistakes, and even moral obliquities into which
men, acting from ordinary motives, are betrayed.

The Biblical revelation, if capable of proof at all, can be established
only as a historically guaranteed fact. All other modes of proof which
have been made use of have already been found unserviceable. Thus the
arguments drawn from the necessity of inspiration are of no weight,
because the a priori style of reasoning is carried into a sphere to
which it cannot fitly be applied. Arguments of this sort, which can be
set aside as nothing more than assumptions, are of little value. As
nothing but divine testimony can assure us of a divine fact, we must,
after being satisfied with the validity of the creden-

tials, interrogate revelation itself. The authority of the Old
Testament, confirmed by a vast array of miracles and by the evidence of
accomplished prophecy, was accepted not only by the Old Testament
Church, but by our Lord and His apostles, and passed over into the
Christian Church with divine sanction before the ISTew Testament
literature, properly so called, was prepared for the Church's use.

As to the New Testament books, to which we shall now more specially
refer, we may affirm that it is only on the authority and credibility of
a divine teacher—the Messiah Himself—that the proof of the theopneustic
character of the Xew Testament Scriptures rests. The Lord Jesus said it,
and His guarantee or promise secured its historic certainty. He promised
to the apostles, that for the delivery of the communi cations made to
them by His oral teaching or subsequent revelations, they should be
supernaturally guided by the Holy Ghost the Comforter. We conclude,
accordingly, that they were so guided. The cogency of this deduction
needs no con firmation. The theopneustic character of the apostles'
instruc tion, whether historical or doctrinal, whether oral or written,
belongs to a class of extraordinary or miraculous operations of the Holy
Spirit. They belong to the invisible miracle, and Luthardt well
observes: " He who says revelation says miracle, and miracles cannot be
explained."

From this it follows that we need make no attempt to prove the
inspiration of apostles to a theological disputant who sees in Jesus
only an ordinary human teacher, or one, like the old prophets, only
under the general influence of the Holy Spirit. With such an opponent it
is vain to debate on this subject; and this is the case with a
considerable number of those who are opposed to supernatural or plenary
inspira tion. They recognise in Jesus only a man of like passions with
ourselves, on whom the Deity wrought, and in whom the Deity dwelt, in a
peculiar way, by providences and influences of an exceptional character,
but not the only-

begotten Sun. But, on the contrary, he who acknowledges the Lord Jesus
as Messiah, and as the Only-begotten of the Father, cannot for a moment
entertain a doubt as to the truth of any of His promises or
declarations. Hence the only point of which it is possible to make a
question is— Whether the promise of the Spirit's inspiration was
actually made, and whether He promised it in the sense which we have put
upon His words.

It is conceded that the proof of the promise as to the mission of the
Comforter for imparting this theopneustic gift must be drawn from the
recorded sayings of Christ in a few passages which we can analyse and
examine (viz. Matt. x. 19 and Luke xii. 14; John xiv. 16, xv. 26, xvi.
7, 14). These passages — spoken by our Lord in immediate view of the
commission which the apostles were to discharge, first within the cities
of Israel, and next on a far more extended scale— contain express
assurances that they should receive the Holy Ghost, and be qualified by
the Holy Ghost in the exercise of a specially conferred gift, to
discharge the duties of their mission in propagating or spreading the
gospel among the nations; that they should receive from the Spirit of
God a mouth and wisdom for the purpose of directing them when summoned
before governors and kings l now and WHAT they should speak on every
occasion; that the Spirit should recall the words of Christ as they were
originally spoken to their remembrance; that the Spirit should further
instruct them on points which could not for the present be comprehended;
and that the Comforter, as a peculiar teacher, should descend upon them,
and equip them in such a way that they would be endued with power from
on high.

An objection has been made, indeed, to the employment of those passages
as a proof of the theopneustic character of their writings, on the
allegation that the men might have the Spirit, but that the tenor of the
promise does not in so

yy.fnri vu; ti TI \>aXr,ffr,r\< (Matt. X. 19).

many words extend to their writings, which might be prepared like any
other literary productions. The objection has been frequently repeated
by one theological school after another. The passages, it is said, do
not contain a word to prove that in the composition of their writings
the apostles were favoured with any higher guidance of the Spirit. It is
contended that the Lord merely names occasions when they might be sum
moned unprepared, or under embarrassing circumstances, to give an oral
statement of their beliefs and Messianic convic tions ; and hence it is
alleged that this animating promise of the immediate operation of His
Spirit and of His special guidance in arduous times might not extend to
their written statements. Nay, it is argued by way of challenge : How
can it be warrantable to hold that the promise extended to a wholly
different case, of which at the time when the words were uttered the
apostles could have no anticipation ?

The objection now stated might have some appearance of plausibility if
that was the only passage, and if there were no other passages
descriptive of the extraordinary gift of inspira tion conferred on the
apostles, except where the promise was in some sort limited. But that is
not the case with the passages preserved to us by John, where Christ
speaks with a certain indefinite generality. He promised that after His
departure to the Father, they should enjoy the peculiar teaching and
guidance of the Comforter, who should per manently abide with them, at
once to teach them all things and lead them into all truth. We do not
need "to prove again, that by the Holy Ghost the Comforter \\ve are to
under stand a divine instructor, helper, or patron who should not only
qiialify them for their commission, but impart a full insight into
Christ's religion. He was to come as a divine Person to impart a
permanent theopneustic gift, which was to be exercised in every
department of apostolic activity. They were to be under the constant
influence and higher guidance of the Spirit for all official duty. "We
are fully warranted to

conclude that if Christ promised the immediate guidance of the Comforter
as often as they were called, in their capacity of apostles, to give
instruction in the facts and doctrines of His religion, He
unquestionably comprehended within the scope of that promise the case of
giving religious instruction through the medium of written documents
addressed to the various Churches of the apostolic age and to the Church
of all succeeding times. And the apostles, in prefixing their name and
office, to their various Epistles, intimated this fact to them and to
us. As the theopneustic gift was permanent, while they continued to
discharge their functions, we must suppose them to have been as much
under divine guidance in the com position of their writings as in their
oral instruction. The validity of this inference cannot be denied or
disputed.

The opponents of Biblical revelation, accordingly, have recourse to
another mode of assault. Some expressly deny that in the passages to
which we appeal anything is promised even remotely approaching to the
theopneustic gift. This is the favourite modern theory. It is maintained
that nothing more is meant than the ordinary influence of grace, and
that our Lord and His apostles never thought of a special higher power,
or of IMMEDIATE divine inspiration imparted by the Comforter the Holy
Ghost. The recent exegesis holds that Christ promised no more than the
common supply of divine grace and the ordinary concurrence of divine
Providence; and that it is unwarrantable to explain the words of any
extra ordinary immediate assistance in the way of plenary inspira tion,
or in the exercise of a theopneustic gift. In reply to this, it may
suffice to say that we have only to reflect on the circumstances and
condition of the apostles at the time when the Lord uttered the words,
to be convinced that, according to the usage and scope of language, it
is unwarrantable to refer those memorable promises as to the Holy
Spirit's operations on their minds either to ordinary grace, or to the
enlargement of their minds in the natural leadings of Providence. The

Lord Jesus was preparing the disciples in these later promises for the
approaching separation, when they should be left without the visible
guidance and immediate direction they had heretofore enjoyed. They had
up to that moment turned to Him in every difficulty, distrusting their
own wisdom, and willing to be led. And as they would be troubled and
paralyzed at His death, He promised another guide, the Comforter, who
should be to them what He had been, and who was permanently to abide
with them.

In the proposition laid down, it was affirmed that prophets and apostles
were supplied by the Spirit with gifts which must be distinguished from
ordinary grace. The modern doctrine maintains the opposite of this; and
the advocates of the mediating theology agree in the denial of it. Dr.
Rothe, who is usually represented as the author of a conclusive
discussion on the subject, labours to make out that the inspiration of
the Biblical writers is identical with the spiritual illumination
imparted to every Christian. He limits the aid of the Spirit to the work
of enlightening their minds to apprehend the objective revelation, but
does not place it in the immediate production of a divine message, or of
religious knowledge for officially guiding and directing others. But
inspiration, whether found in the Old Testament prophets or the New
Testament apostles, must be distinguished from common spiritual
illumination, if we are not minded, in the indulgence of mere
prepossessions and theories, to confound what Scripture has plainly
separated. The modern identifica tion of the two must be denied if we
take into account either the distinction of natural and ordinary, and
supernatural and extraordinary gifts, or the purpose for which the
latter were expressly given. The object of the Spirit in conferring the
purely personal illumination was to enable men involved in corruption
and darkness to appropriate the offered grace of the gospel. The object
of the Holy Spirit in conferring inspiration, on the other hand, was
OFFICIAL, to qualify

prophets and apostles to deliver a divine communication unmingled with
foreign elements. It is only necessary to appeal, in proof of this, to
the terms of the commission with which they were invested.

As to the Old Testament prophets, their commission, as well as their
official messages, are sufficiently apparent from the preface commonly
prefixed to their communications.: " Thus saith the Lord." And we cannot
examine their lofty, and frequently awful, announcements without
perceiving that they had received their intimations as to the future in
so many words. Often they did not themselves comprehend them, and had to
inquire and search what the Spirit, which was in them, did signify (1
Pet. i. 11). And they were held bound, under the penalty of death, to
fulfil to the letter what the Spirit enjoined, as appears from the sad
end of the unnamed prophet, who had been sent to cry against the altar
in Bethel (1 Kings xiii. 21 ff.).

In their oral communications to the people, to kings and princes, they
seem to have had a copious flow of discourse, or a brief and condensed
message according to the peculiarity of the times and occasions.

When we inquire whether divine action was suspended or withdrawn from
the apostles in the execution of their office, we find—(1) that the
promises given to them went far beyond the idea of their being left to
the exercise of their own wisdom; (2) that miracles and supernatural
gifts in all their rich variety abode with them to the end of their
career. And these miraculous gifts were signs and pledges of the unseen
miracle of plenary inspiration upon their minds. The following
considerations will suffice to prove that the theo-pneustic gift is not
to be reduced to the level of ordinary grace:—

​1. The theory which merges the distinction between ordi nary and
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, loses sight of the divine sovereignty
which the entire Scripture presupposes as

to God's speaking by chosen organs to His Church (Heb. i. 1). All
believers, it is true, receive in the same way the renewing of the Holy
Ghost and the salvation of the gospel. But it was not so with the
communication of the supernatural gifts. Let me illustrate this by an
example. When Peter said to the impotent man : " In the name of Jesus
Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk," we trace the clearest evidence of
a divine communication (Acts iii. 6); or when he said: "/Eneas, Jesus
Christ inaketh thee whole: arise, and make thy bed" (ix. 34), we see
such an intimation conveyed by the Spirit to the apostle's mind, that he
was left in no doubt as to the issue. He fully believed and expected
that the words, which were divinely inspired and prophetic, would no
sooner be uttered than they would be accompanied with the miraculous
result which followed. There we see the invisible inspiration and the
visible sign, the latter the pledge of the former. We can trace the
existence of a divine communication or invisible miracle on Peter's
mind, as well as the visible miracle in the immediate cure,—a miracle of
knowledge and a miracle of power conjoined, a prophecy and an
accomplishment united. Without adducing other instances of the same
thing scattered over the whole page of revelation, let it suffice to say
that in all such miracles the theopneustic gift was announced and
attested by the supernatural fact. The cessation of those miraculous
gifts at the close of the apostolic age—when they had served the
important function to which we have referred in the infancy of the
Church—was a noteworthy and signifi cant fact. But, during the whole
period of their continuance, they were a sign and pledge, as well as an
explanation, of the presence and reality of the theopneustic gift. The
theory which identifies the composition of Scripture with the exercise
of ordinary grace, is burdened with insuperable difficulties. The design
of referring all to a general law, is to make the matter more acceptable
to the understanding. It is not by general rationalistic reasonings,
however, that historic facts are

to be determined; and this point must be decided as a matter of fact.

The conclusion to which we come, therefore, is, that the gift of
inspiration differs in kind, and not merely in measure, from the
operation of ordinary grace. We have ample evidence to prove that the
apostles, as the organs of Christ's revelation to the Church, were the
subjects of a supernatural intervention absolutely unique, and
essentially distinct in kind, from the general experience of Christian
disciples. The gift of plenary inspiration was limited to individuals
selected by divine sovereignty, and temporary in duration. It ter
minated with the closing of the canon, that is, when the revelation was
completed. The other is common to all true Christians.

​2. It must be further remarked, that the theory which makes inspiration
identical with ordinary grace, fails to account for THE AUTHORITY which
Scripture uniformly claims and asserts for itself as the word of God,
and which the Church, Jewish and Christian, has always with one consent
ascribed to it. If the prophets of the Old Testament, or the apostles in
the Xew Testament, had nothing of direct and divine communication
essentially distinguishing their words and writings from those of
ordinary disciples, it is not possible to give any explanation of the
divine authority always ascribed to their announcements as distinct from
those of ordinary men. The declaration on the part of the prophets when
they said: " Thus saith the Lord," or on the part of apostles when they
introduced their Epistles with the words: " Paul, an apostle," " Peter,
an apostle of Jesus Christ," not only implies that they derived their
commission from above, but intimates: " He that despiseth, despiseth not
man, but God, who hath also given to us His Holy Spirit" (1 Thess. iv.
8).

​3. And what would necessarily follow if, according to the current
German theory, inspiration were identical with

ordinary illumination ? A simple reductio ad absurdum will here suffice.
If the difference between the two was merely in degree, and not in kind,
the theopneustic gift must be regarded as universal and coincident with
true discipleship. But every one perceives that this is not the case.
More than that, revelation on such a supposition would have no finality,
but be an ever increasing quantity, with new developments without limit.
Xor do we see how, on the theory which we impugn, extravagant or
enthusiastic develop ments could be either reduced to a standard or
stopped. If Scripture were not viewed as a completed revelation, with an
absolute finality, we should be compelled to canvass in every age the
claims of such growths as Montanism, or Irvingism, or modern Romanism,
whose ecclesiastical organs, as is proved by the Vatican decrees, lay
claim to a self-developing advance in doctrine, which asserts itself as
equivalent to a sort of inspiration. By the finality of apostolic
doctrine, we can nip all this in the bud. We conclude, therefore, that
it is a vain attempt to identify illumination common to all believers,
with inspiration peculiar to prophets and apostles. The latter are said
to speak with the same authority as Christ Himself (Luke x. 16), which
they could do only on the ground of official commission, not on the
ground of personal illumination.

I said, moreover, in the proposition laid down, that super natural
revelation was given in Tinman forms of speech. This is one significant
proof of the divine condescension of the Holy Spirit, that instead of
speaking in an elevated style of diction, and in the communication only
of ideas above the capacity or range of the bulk of mankind, or merely
for cul tured and philosophic minds, He speaks from one mind to another
in easy, clear, and perspicuous language, level to the apprehension of
all tribes and nations. This is the glory of the Spirit's work of
revelation, however profound the things themselves mav be to which the
revelation refers. It is not

necessary to define the MODE OF INSPIRATION, but only to assert the
divine fact. We take the historic fact; but we decline every attempt to
explain the inscrutable mode. That the theopneustic gift was imparted,
is evident from the explicit statement that all Scripture is
God-inspired (2 Tim. iii. 16), and that holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost (2 1'et. i. 21). But no finite mind can
venture, without presumption, to say how the human faculties con curred
and acted with the Spirit's activity in the expression of a divine
oracle. So various, in fact, was the mode of His divine communications,
that it is impossible to frame a theory which either takes in all the
facts or exhibits the manifold variety of ways in which the Almighty
Spirit, who alone has the key to the human heart and to all its powers,
was pleased to communicate His will. We repudiate all attempts to
explain the mode in which revelation was conveyed to the human mind, or
by inspired men to the mind of others. We conserve the miracle and the
mystery. All such theories as the suggestion, elevation, and guidance or
superintendence, propounded by Doddridge and others, only darken counsel
by words without knowledge. With Dr. Chalmers we fully agree when he
says: " The important question with us is not the process of the
manufacture, but the qualities of the resulting commodity. The former we
hold not to be a rele vant, and we are not sure that it is a legitimate
inquiry." l Our system is to have no system. We maintain the fact and
leave the mode untouched, because beyond our ken. The French writers,
such as Gaussen, M. d'Aubigne, Monod, Jalaquier, and liemond, write with
more reserve and caution than any other class of theologians in modern
times. Thus Gaussen, in the same spirit with Chalmers, said, when taken
to task for his admirable book: " My theory," said he, " is to have no
theory." While repudiating the notion that the human element absorbed
the divine, and the theory that 1 See his admirable chapter on
Inspiration in his Evidences.

every word was given by direct dictation, we hold that the only safe and
judicious ground to occupy is to maintain the fact, and to regard the
mode as inexplicable. The Scripture, with that reticence which is one of
its marked peculiarities, gives no disclosure of the mode which the Holy
Ghost adopted. And on this whole subject, enveloped as it is in mystery,
we may affirm with confidence that the facts are so various as to be
incapable of classification by any investi gator; that the message came
in the Old Testament in audible words, in dreams, in visions, in
ecstasies or raptures, and in the New Testament by the Spirit's
recalling the things spoken by Christ to memory, and by showing the
apostles many things which they could not bear while Christ was with
them. But our ignorance of the method not only dis qualifies us from
forming a consistent theory, but actually supplies a source of security
and satisfaction.

The Scripture is the word of God, inspired throughout by the Spirit of
God in every part, and given in human forms of expression. We must by no
means maintain, that the sacred writers were nothing but machines—nay,
must be upon our guard against the attempt to define the undefinable.
That a supernatural and miraculous operation prompted holy men to. speak
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and that the mental peculiarity of
the writers \\vas not suppressed by the theopneustic gift, as appears
from their peculiar style and expression, must be accepted as the two
sides of a great truth, which some have attempted to explain by
immediate suggestion or dictation. But it is better not to attempt to
explain the inexplicable. We define not the nature or mode of the
miracle or divine intervention; for miracle it was; and Scripture omits
all more particular definition beyond the fact that holy men were
wrought upon and moved by the Holy Ghost (2 Pet. i. 21). And we accept
its silences as well as its disclosures. When Scripture stops, we stop.

That there was infallible supernatural guidance, and that

this extends to all the canonical books in the Old and New Testament, is
undoubted. But how it acted it would be at once perilous and audacious
to define, and a contented nescience is better than a presumptuous
knowledge. The analogy between Christ's Person and the Scriptures has
often been adduced, and truly serves as an illustration. The two fold
nature in the one Person of our Lord is there, and con curring to one
result. But it is not possible to say where the one nature begins and
the other ends in the production of the great redemption-work. His
utterances and actions, divine yet human, were the utterances and
actions of the God-man. I repeat, I retain the miracle and the mystery.

Another point laid down by us was, that the theopnenstic \< gift and
Scripture are co-extensive. The current theory of the day is the reverse
of this. It asserts that a line is to be drawn between Scripture and the
word of God; that God's word must be held to mean, not Scripture as we
find it, but a certain spiritual kernel or religious substance which is
to be extracted by a critical process; that, in a word, the Scripture is
but the husk or shell in which the word of God is found, as the quartz
is separated from the gold embedded in it.

Though many theologians of this century make this the foundation of
their system, there is absolutely nothing to countenance or support it
from Genesis to Pievelation. And to establish the opposite, it is enough
to adduce what Jesus said: " Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye
are gods ? If He called them gods, to whom the word of God came, and the
Scripture cannot be broken," etc. (John x. 34). He repre sents the word
of God and the Scripture as identical. But it is asked : Is not the
theopneustic gift spoken of by the Apostle Paul in such a way as to give
countenance to the idea that some directions such as those relating to
conjugal ditties were given without any supernatural guidance, as when
he says : " I speak this by permission, and not by commandment" (1 Cor.

​vii. 6) ? The true rendering is : "I speak this by indulgence, or
allowance, to you, not by commandment" (icara o-vyyvcofj-rjv, ov Kar
evriTayriv). And in another passage, where he says : " I command, yet
not I, but the Lord," the allusion is unmis takably to the Lord's own
teaching, in the days of His flesh, revealing the Father's mind. When he
says: " To the rest speak I, not the Lord," he communicates a further
inspired announcement given to the apostle himself.

The theory advocated by that school, with a zeal worthy of a better
cause, simply explodes the revelation of word, and appeals to the
revelation of fact. It disjoins what cannot be disjoined. It declares,
with an audacity approaching to bravado, that Christianity can dispense
with any doctrine of inspiration. On the contrary, the plenary
inspiration of the Scriptures may be called a question of existence for
the Protestant Church, which is not supported by that reserve power of
tradition and of authority which gives coherence and strength to the
Eomish system. It is obvious that the Protestant Church cannot forego
the authority of Scripture, or, which amounts to the same thing, permit
it to be regarded as the word of man, without inevitable defeat and
ruin. The theological conflicts of the time may be said to hinge for the
most part on the view which has been accepted on the doctrine of
inspiration, or may be traced back to the opinions which have found
currency on this point. In fact, we may affirm that no doctrine has
assumed more varying aspects in the Protestant Church,—every change of
theological opinion finding its echo or making its vibrations felt in
the question of inspiration, on which all other truths ultimately
depend.

In conclusion, I will subjoin a brief allusion to some points of moment
connected \\vith this topic.

​1. The testimony of the Holy Spirit to the Scriptures. This is an
operation of the Spirit in the exercise of His applicatory grace, by and
through the Scriptures themselves. Whatever enthusiasts may have" held,
no judicious divine ever

asserted that the Spirit gives this internal criterion, or testifies
without the word or apart from the word itself. On the contrary, they
always, in express terras, declared that we owe this testimony to the
efficacy of the Spirit and word con jointly, not separately. They
ascribed the effect to the Spirit not without the word, but by the word
(not extra aut citra vcrbum). The testimony of Scripture about itself,
and the efficacious testimony of the Spirit, concur to one result. The
enthusiasts who have been wont to call the written word a dead letter,
commonly speak of the Spirit as illuminating and regenerating the mind
without the word; and Calvinistic divines have often had occasion to
complain of a wrong done them by the Lutherans, in representing them as
maintaining an immediate testimony of the Spirit. None of their best
divines did so. They held that, as the sun is seen by his own light,
Scripture is known by its own efficacy and the power of the Holy Spirit.

​2. The reception of the Spirit's supernatural inspiration lays the
foundation for ALL THE AUTHORITY of revelation. Kevelation is accepted
and obeyed not on the ground of its adaptation to my reason or
conscience,—though it is in har mony with both,—but on the ground of its
supernatural and theopneustic character. Its " Thus saith the Lord"
carries with it the demand for prompt unquestioning submission. And
though it accredits itself experimentally, it starts from a heavenly
attestation which constrains consent. All true faith, in a word, is from
authority, and rests primarily on the evidence of miracles and prophecy.
It is this faith of authority that has given rise to all the
achievements, devo tional ardour, and martyr zeal of the Christian
Church.

The other school, known as that of CHRISTIAN CONSCIOUS NESS, advocates
the autonomy of the Christian mind and the Church's emancipation from
the outward letter of the Scrip ture. It maintains bold and perilous
positions. It maintains (1) that the New Testament Is rather the
expression of the

Christian consciousness and of the Church's life than authori tative
revelation ; (2) that the Church is rather to be governed by the living
progressive Spirit of the Church than by the letter of Scripture; (3)
that evangelical doctrine receives new forms and phases from the
Christian consciousness and the ever-developing influence of the Spirit.

Schleiermacher, to whom this school owes its origin, broke away from a
faith of authority, and assumed the Christian consciousness or pious
feeling as the source of knowledge and the matter of his science. He
wished to secure for theology an independent territory against
philosophy and the higher criticism. And, with a boldness amounting to
bravado, the leaders of that school propound the most negative opinions.
To affirm that the Christian consciousness is the source of spiritual
knowledge is, in fact, a Quaker principle—defective and one-sided. It
puts the Spirit within instead of the word without, the only full
expression of the Spirit's mind. It furnishes but guesses at truth. The
Christian consciousness is not the NORMA NOBMANS, but NORMA NORMATA.

L E C T U E E IV.

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL.

Spirit's work in the application of redemption to the -•- individual
will next engage our attention. And we must carry with us the thought
that the whole interposition of the Spirit of God rests on the ground of
the Mediator's finished work. Obstacles stood in the way of the Spirit's
return to the human heart of such a kind, that they were insur mountable
by any finite resources. But they are put out of the way by Christ's
vicarious sacrifice and royal priesthood — that is, by merit and
efficacy, or purchase and power.

The efficacious operation of the Spirit presupposes God's sovereign love
to individuals, or a personal election. Con sidered from the true point
of view, the electing purpose of God implies that its efficacy has a
special destination, and that it will reach its proper objects. They who
interpret the divine word by the primary axiom that all men must share
alike, and who impugn the absolute right of God to bestow salvation as
men bestow their alms on whom He will by a purely free donation, forget,
in their anxiety to be on a friendly footing with the Spirit of the age,
that the advantage which their theory seems to gain by enlarging the
extent of God's love is more than counterbalanced at another point — by
lack of efficacy. God's love finds out its objects. It is something far
other than a mere benevolent but inefficacious desire in the divine mind
which wishes, but does not poten tially will, the salvation of men.

The presuppositions or postulates of the doctrine of the

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 163

Spirit, so far as man's necessities are concerned, are the
following:—Their impotence for good takes for granted — first, their
want of the Spirit and of all spiritual life; secondly, a subjection to
the kingdom of sin and Satan; and thirdly, a voluntary aversion to God
and rebellion against Him. This suggests a threefold corresponding
inquiry : first, how is the forfeited presence of the Spirit restored to
the human heart, and what effects accompany His return ? secondly, how
are the effectually called translated from the family of Satan into the
state of adopted sons ? and thirdly, how is corrupted nature fully
changed and made meet here and hereafter for the love and service of God
? The first two points will be considered by us in the present lecture.

I. The forfeited presence of the Spirit is restored by Christ's
mediatorship and obedience to God's law, in precept and penalty. They
who fail to apprehend the atonement, or reduce it to an empty pageant or
governmental expedient, in effect remove this mission of the Comforter
from its de pendence on the finished work of Christ as the basis or
meritorious ground of the Spirit's return to the human heart. They
connect the atonement not with the require ments of the divine nature
and the inflexible law of God, but with a supposed public justice, which
amounts only to a rectoral display or a deterring motive, but secures
nothing. They forget, in the zealous advocacy of their universalism,
that the Lord God is the only august public worthy of regard, and that
there is no other to which the Most High will adapt His administration.
But the question is not as to the extent of the atonement, which rests
with the divine good pleasure, but as to its validity as a procuring
cause or price, which many, in their anxiety to represent as meant for
all, totally denude of its efficacy. They thus undermine the suretyship,
substitution, and imputation on which the gift of the Spirit proceeds.
They explode the deep federal oneness

which lies at the foundation of the whole transaction, and secures the
inalienable supply of the Spirit to all for whom the atonement was
offered.

The nature of man's ruin, as implying the forfeiture of the Spirit,
furnishes the rationale of the entire doctrine of the Spirit. Man is no
longer a SPIRITUAL BEING, and they who speak in that way of his
capacities and powers, and of the condition of human nature as it now
is, introduce a form of speech which has no true application to the
subject. Viewed in his unfallen state, of which the renewed man has some
faint conception, and of which the Spirit-filled humanity of Jesus was
the true image, man might be described as a spiritual being. But with no
propriety of language can the expression SPIRITUAL be applied to man in
his fallen state. So far as the expression is intended to obviate the
objection that the operations of the Spirit violate the integrity of
man's moral nature, the language may be capable of some vindica tion,
because it brings us back to the true idea of anthro pology, and because
original sin was never understood, except by Macius, to have become the
substance of the man. But the term " spiritual" has so precise a sense,
and is so connected in our language with Biblical usage, that every
other acceptation is to be avoided as liable to miscon ception.

If we delineate men's actual relation to God, they are described as
having not the Spirit (Jude 19), and, as the necessary consequence of
this, as sensual or natural (1 Cor. ii. 14); in other words, so sunk
into animal life that their wisdom is earthly (Jas. iv. 15), and they
themselves without God (Eph. ii. 12).

God gave the Spirit to Adam, the earthly and spiritual elements of His
constitution being so fully balanced that he was neither preponderantly
animal nor absolutely pneumatic, but a living soul occupied in all his
faculties by the indwell ing Spirit. And had he continued stedfast, or
taken the true

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 165

way, which corresponded with the idea of man, he would have passed in a
straight course into the pneumatic or spiritual without tasting of
death. But by his apostasy the Spirit departed, and he was left in
possession of a mere natural or animal being, having not the Spirit
(Jude 19). That the soul is deprived of the Spirit and of all divine
light, and that he is not disposed to those objects which the law of God
enjoins, is too evident to be questioned. Only conscience is left to act
in him along with the dim outline of the moral law, of which the
lingering remains may still be traced on every human heart. And it may
be said of conscience, that its voice is heard more in accusing than in
excusing. It is noteworthy that in the entire earthly life of Jesus
there is no mention of conscience, for the obvious reason that He had
the full image of God, and received the Spirit not by measure.

Thus detached from his primeval ties by the forfeiture of the Spirit,
man follows the natural rather than the spiritual, the human rather than
the divine. The religious sentiment gives way in all his course before
the prevailing influence of the worldly mind. The wrong choice, which in
fact is uniformly adopted, must be traced to a wrong bias; and till the
nature is renewed by the restoration of the Spirit, no motive brought to
bear on men's minds avails to turn them toward God. Acting from a bias
which draws the mind away, they prefer the shadowy to the real, the
speculative to the practical, the superficial and sensuous to those
profoundly spiritual and humbling discoveries which are called forth by
the divine word. On this point it is necessary to adjust the balance
with the utmost delicacy to preserve the due equipoise. Full emphasis
must be given, in all the discussion of this question, to the original
state of that fair structure, of which Howe remarks with novel beauty: "
The stately ruins are visible to every eye that bear in their front yet
extant this doleful inscription : HERE GOD ONCE DWELT." 1

The absence of the Spirit, which man, as originally formed, possessed as
the Spirit of illumination in his understanding, and of power in all his
faculties, has left the mind in moral and spiritual impotence. If regard
be had to the understand ing, the unconverted cannot know the things of
the Spirit of God (1 Cor. ii. 14); to the will, he cannot 1 be subject
to the law of God (Rom. viii. 7); to worship, he cannot call Jesus Lord
(1 Cor. xii. 3); to practice, he cannot please God (Bom. viii. 8); to
fruit, he cannot bear fruit (John xv. 4); to faith, he cannot receive
the Spirit of truth (John xiv. 17). His familiarity with sacred truths,
which he does not love, only leaves him seared in conscience and twice
dead. For this impotence the regenerating power of the Holy Ghost is
absolutely indispensable.

The fact of man's inability, which Scripture everywhere asserts or
implies, is to be explained by the withdrawal of the Spirit, which left
him in SPIRITUAL DEATH. Scripture, therefore, in terms the most express,
denies to man the power or ability to think a good thought (2 Cor. iii.
5), or to receive the things of the Spirit of God (1 Cor. ii. 14); and
declares that human nature is wholly turned away from God, and enmity
against Him (Bom. viii. 7); and this state of the heart has a
determining influence on the will in all reliuious and

O O

moral judgments.

That decisive fact is not apprehended in the same way in Christian and
philosophic thought, even where the latter makes the nearest
approximation to the truth. The uniform language of Christianity is that
it is the state of the will, in other words, of the heart, that either
illuminates or darkens the understanding in its spiritual or moral
views, arid that the relation between the two is not like ordinary
knowledge, according to which we must first know a thing before we love
it; for, on the contrary, the secularized mind must first love divine
things with a spiritual relish before it fully knows 1 Xo true exegete
will allow that the \*\>l Si/'vara/ is simply equivalent to ol £i?.u.

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 167

them. Hence there is an important sense in which we may affirm that it
is not the intellectual knowledge which deter mines the conclusions of
the will, but, conversely, the tendency of the will or heart which
determines the judgment of the understanding. That is, beyond question,
the mode of state ment given in the Scriptures, which put spiritual life
before true knowledge, the renewal of the heart before the possibility
of a spiritual judgment. Coleridge, in his Literary Remains, beautifully
remarks: " I believe and hold it as the funda mental article of
Christianity, that I am a fallen creature ; that I am of myself capable
of moral evil, but not of myself capable of moral good, and that an evil
ground existed in my will previously to any given act, or assignable
moment of time, in my consciousness; I am born a child of wrath. This
fearful mystery I pretend not to understand. I cannot even conceive the
possibility of it, but I know that it is so. My conscience, the sole
fountain of certainty, commands me to believe it, and would itself be a
contradiction, were it not so —and what is real must be possible."

Into the discussion of the relation of free-will and divine grace we are
not required, by the topic which we are treating, to enter in all its
bearings. As it is often handled, it is frequently more a metaphysical
debate on the laws of mind than a question in exegetical or Biblical
theology. On the subject of free-will and the Spirit's agency, the
following remarks may suffice : Man's free agency is postulated by every
one who apprehends the subject with any measure of precision, as a point
which may be described as necessary to his personality and
responsibility as a rational creature. But along with the admission of
spontaneity and freedom, we must not less strongly hold that man in his
natural state, under the forfeiture of the Spirit, uniformly chooses the
evil in preference to the good. On the one hand, he is free from
co-action or constraint, even when the will is carried headlong in a
career of sin. On the other hand, THE WILL ITSELF is

DISEASED and vitiated. These are the two sides of the question; and when
we put them together, we say with Augustin: " The will is always free,
but not always good." The will cannot cease to be free, without ceasing
to exist. Man could not be deprived of that freedom without the entire
destruction of his mental being, as a rational and responsible creature.
The liberty of the will consists in this, that he is not carried
headlong by blind fatalistic impulse or by natural necessity or
constraint. Whatever he does, he freely does. But the will may be free,
and not liberated. He may be a free agent, and yet the servant of sin.
The will may be free, and only exercise' its freedom against the will of
God. I strongly hold the duty of asserting the freedom of the will and
the necessity of divine grace as two sides of an inex plicable mystery
in the same way as holds true of many other theological points. My duty
is to conserve the mystery which the nationalistic understanding is only
too prone to invade—to assert it, not to explain, far less to explode
it.

THE SAYINGS OF JESUS ON THE SPIRIT'S WORK IN REGENERATION.

​1. " Verily, verily, I say imio tlice, Except a man l\>c lorn ttfjain,
he cannot see the kingdom of God. . . . Except a man be born of water
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which
is born of the flesh is flesh ; and tluit which is born of the Sjjirit
is spirit " (John iii. 3—6). Nicodemus came to question the Lord about
His mission, and the kingdom of God which he plainly saw was about to be
set up. But he was at once met by the practical question bearing on his
personal salvation. By tin's it at once appeared that Jesus came not to
be catechised and to answer curious questions, but to teach what bore
upon the salvation of His hearers. He made answer rather to the state of
mind than to the words of Nicodemus. He showed that a change upon the
whole man was indispensably necessary, if he should ever

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING-WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 169

have a right of citizenship in the kingdom of God, which does not here
mean the eternal felicity, but the Messianic kingdom in all its
amplitude of meaning.

As to the phrase "born again," it is expounded by one class of
interpreters as meaning a second time, by another as meaning from above,
and the decision based on the general parallelism of Scripture falls
very commonly in favour of the rendering a second time. But it must be
admitted that neither the import of the term (civwQev) nor the style of
expression used by John in speaking of regeneration lends it any
countenance. 1 For iny own part, I am more disposed to accept it as a
peculiarity of John's style of language borrowed from his Master, and as
denoting FROM ABOVE. The Lord repeats His statement as to the necessity
of regeneration, and adds the twofold principle or cause by which it is
produced : lorn of water and of the Spirit. These terms intimate the
meritorious and efficient cause.

The term WATER has been variously interpreted. (1) Some refer it to
baptism,—an opinion current in Patristic theology from the earliest
times, and asserted in the Greek and Latin Church and in some of the
Protestant formularies. But it is

1 Most of the versions, the Lutheran, French, English, Dutch, translate
again, and have been mainly influenced by the reply of Nicodemus, who,
in asking whether a man could enter his mother's womb again, uses the
term rendered a second time (Sturspat) (ver. 4). On the other hand, the
Greek exegetes, Origen, Chrysostom, Theophylact, and of the moderns
Storr, Noesselt, Schleusner, Liicke, and others, render the word from
above : and their arguments are these : (1) The general, though not
uniform, New Testament usage (John iii. 13, xix. 11, 23 ; Jas. i. 17,
iii. 15 ; Mark xv. 38; Matt, xxvii. 51). (2) Jesus alternates the
expression with another which is equivalent to from above, when He says
that which is born of the Spirit. (3) The Evangelist John, when
referring to regeneration, always describes it as a birth from God (John
i. 13 ; 1 John ii. 29, iii. 9, iv. 7, v. 1, 4, 18). (4) Nicodemus' word,
which has done more to sway expositors than anything else, is not
construed with being born, but with entering again into his mother's
womb. All these reasons incline the balance toward the rendering from
above. But, on the other hanJ, the general New Testament parallelism
seems to incline it in favour of the rendering "a second time " (Tit.
iii. 5 ; 1 Pet. i. 3 ; 2 Cor. v. 17). If we decide in favour of the
translation born again, —with most of the Protestant versions,—it can
only be upon the ground of the general parallelism of the apostles'
language.

untenable, as will be evident to every mind that weighs the matter in
the light of common observation. The water to which the Lord refers
CERTAINLY REGENERATES, and entitles those who receive it to enter the
kingdom of God, from which no true member can ever be cast out
again,—which cannot be affirmed of baptism in every case. (2) Some take
it as a hendiadys,—a view in which most of the lieformed divines
concur,—implying that the Spirit acts with a cleans ing efficacy like
that of water. (3) Some of the ablest Dutch divines, for example
Cocceius, Vitringa, Lainpe, interpret the water here named in the light
of Ezekiel's words: " Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye
shall be clean " (chap, xxxvi. 25). "With these last interpreters I
fully concur. The sprinklings, ablutions, lustrations, common in the
Mosaic ritual, primarily referred to the removal of the guilt which
rendered the person of the worshipper unclean, and removed him from all
approach to God in sanctuary service. The purification of the leper, and
of those who were unclean by contact with the dead, was effected by
sprinkling them with Avater in which a portion of blood, or of the ashes
of the red heifer, according to the law, was mingled (Lev. xiv. 1; Num.
xix. 1 ff.). It is not to be forgotten that Nicodemus was an
accomplished teacher, and was profoundly conversant with all the Mosaic
rites. He knew well that on the occasion of taking Israel into covenant
Moses took the blood of calves and of goats, with water and scarlet wool
and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book and all the people (Heb. ix. 19)
; and that a laver, deriving all its value from the altar, or the
victims slain on it, was prepared between the altar and the entrance of
the tabernacle, that they who approached the Holy One might be made
clean. The water referred to by our Lord in this con nection was but the
ceremonial expression for the cleansing of our person by His own
obedience or atoning sacrifice, proving the complete removal of guilt
and of everything that could exclude us on the Around of law from the
kingdom of God.

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 171

The second term, SPIRIT, is the personal Holy Spirit, who gives the
inward capacity or fitness for the kingdom of God, who breaks the power
of sin, and makes all things new. The water and the Spirit are not to be
confounded. They are

THE TWO CONJOINED ELEMENTS ; ill Other words, the MERI TORIOUS CAUSE and
the EFFICIENT CAUSE, which introduce the sinner into the kingdom of God.
The WATER and the SPIRIT are not to be explained as a mere hendiadys, or
the use of two words for one. The terms are plainly adapted to the tenor
of Ezekiel's prophecy (chap, xxxvi. 25 ff.) (comp. Zech. xiii.), and are
both intended to be significant.

A third time, with a view to make the statement as to the necessity of
regeneration more urgent and emphatic, our Lord substantially repeats
His declaration: " Marvel not that I said to you, You must be born
again." And then, to anti cipate all cavil or exception to the mode in
which that omnipotent act of God displays itself, He adds: " The wind
bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst
not tell whence it cometh, or whither it goeth: so is every one that is
born of the Spirit" (ver. 8). That this analogy is taken from nature,
and is much like one of His parables, is not doubtful. They who have
attempted, with Origen and Augustin, to dismiss the comparison and take
the term translated wind for the personal Spirit, have nothing to say in
answer to the argument that all these expressions: " bloweth," " the
sound thereof," " the hearing of the sound," and the implied analogy in
the words " so is every one" must be accepted as an illustrative
description or comparison. The wind, as a natural phenomenon at that
moment,—as in the case of many of our Lord's illustrations,—might arrest
their attention. The points of comparison are obviously these: (1) The
Spirit's agency is sovereign, like the wind blowing where it will; (2)
The mode of His activity is inscrutable: it is like the wind, in regard
to which we can neither say where it begins to blow nor where it is
hushed to rest ;

​(3) The efficacy is irresistible anil the effects indubitable; we hear
the sound thereof.

​2. A passage of similar import is the following: " It is the Spirit
that quickcncth; the flesh proflteth nothing" (Johuvi. Go). Christ does
not say my flesh, as in the previous context, where He carries on a
discussion with the men of Capernaum; and the change of expression is
significant. Interpreters, not perceiving this, have been carried away
with the misleading impression that the design was merely to remove
offence in the Jewish mind caused by the declaration that Jesus was the
bread of life. They think that He still continues to declare that the
true life of redeemed men is meritoriously connected with His atoning
death. But Luther, when pressed by this text in the sacramentarian
controversy, saw the change of expression, and accurately referred the
words to the carnal sense of imrenewed men. It is no longer " my flesh,"
as in all the previous context; the expression " the flesh" has no
reference to the flesh of Christ. It is the same antithesis that we find
in the interview with Nico-demus: " That which is born of the flesh is
flesh." The five thousand who would have made Him king were so deeply
offended by His teaching, that they had in a body forsaken Him; and the
reason of their conduct is here traced to the unspirituality and enmity
of the carnal mind. Our Lord declares : it is the Spirit that
quickeneth, or imparts the life of God—a boon requiring omnipotent
power. To one acquainted with the antithesis between flesh and spirit,
or with Scripture language generally, it is plain that the allusion is
not to the human spirit nor to Christ's divine nature, but to the Holy
Spirit.

​3. We come now to what may be called, perhaps, the most conclusive
passage on the Spirit's work in connection with conversion in the whole
compass of Scripture. " And when He is come He will reprove (better:
convince) the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment: of
sin, because (better:

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 1\*73

in regard to the fact that} they believe not on me ; of righteous ness,
because (better : in regard to the fact that] I go to my Father, and ye
see me no more ; of judgment, because (better: in regard to the fact
that) the prince of this world is judged " (John xvi. 8-11). The passage
contains a full and exhaus tive description of the Spirit's work in the
application of redemption, as well as of the mission of the Comforter by
the Son from the Father (John xv. 26). The verb setting forth the
Spirit's function (eXey£e\*) may bear one of two senses— TO REPROVE or
TO CONVINCE. The grounds for the decision, in every special instance,
are supplied by the context. The signification to reprove, which the
term some times bears, implies that a person is reproved for some error
which he has previously held. The other meaning, to con vince, implies
that a person is convinced of some truth previously unknown or
unrealized. The term may either mean to reprove and refute a false
opinion, or to convince one by cogent arguments and ample evidence as to
truth hitherto unknown. Both senses are closely linked together. The
notion of reproving, for which some contend, is wholly to be removed
from the use of the term in this passage. Though they can both be made
to have a show of probability, it is every way preferable, for various
reasons, to accept the meaning TO CONVINCE.

To take one conclusive argument. All the objects are not reprehensible,
and therefore the idea of reproof is not appli cable to them all. Not
only so ; the verb is introduced but once, and not three times, in
connection with the three nouns SIN, RIGHTEOUSNESS, and JUDGMENT ; and
therefore no possible ground exists for admitting any other than a
uniform sense, which is equally applicable to them all.

Another point is the signification of the particle, which is three times
expressed in connection with the several mem bers (viz. on). It cannot
be rendered, as in the English version, because, but in respect to the
fact that. It is here an

exegetical or specifying particle, setting forth that specific kind of
sin, of righteousness, and of judgment, to which allusion shall be made.
In all the members it must certainly .be so taken, because the
grammatical structure is uniform, and the maintenance of the same
signification yields through out an appropriate sense. This conclusion
militates decidedly against giving to the verb the signification " to
reprove," because tilings are mentioned which, so far from being
censurable, are infinitely to be desired in the last two clauses.

We are told, indeed, by the celebrated Gerhard that some exegetes did
give in this way the specific meaning to the particle (ort), and yet
contrived to interpret the verb as meaning to reprove, by the addition
of certain words which it was thought might competently be supplied
though they were not expressed. They filled up a supposed ellipsis as
follows: He shall reprove the world of sin committed, of righteousness
despised, of judgment neglected.

But when we examine that exposition, which found favour with not a few,
many objections present themselves. It is a harsh ellipsis on the most
indulgent consideration. Reproof always strikes on what is
reprehensible—that is, either upon evil done or upon persons favoured
with privileges and chargeable with neglect. But the special neglect
must always be expressed. Not only so; on such a construc tion of the
words, not one expression, but various supple mentary words, must be
supplied to bring out the import. It renders the whole unnatural and
obscure to introduce a different verb to every noun, and it is somewhat
pre sumptuous ; for who is warranted to supplement the language of our
Lord by additions which are not in the text ? Nor are such additions at
all in harmony with the plain and obvious tenor of Christ's words. We
are not then—under the impression that the verb means " to reprove "—to
resort to any supplement so harsh, unnecessary, and unsuitable.

The words are natural and perspicuous as they stand, if we adopt the
other rendering— TO CONVINCE. The meaning is then plain. The proper idea
is that of convincing one of any thing not truly or fully known. And the
objects, as they stand, are of such a nature that one may be convinced
of them all, but not reproved for them all. And if we carry with us the
thought that the Spirit is occupied about the sin of unbelief, which is
the greatest of sins,—about imputed righteousness, the only valid plea
with God, acquired by Christ's obedience unto death,—about the judgment
of the prince of this world,—the language is easy and the sentence
natural.

To come to the import of the term "shall convince." When it is said that
the Spirit shall convince the world,— that is, men generally without the
partition-wall between Jew and Gentile,—it means much more than mere
instruction in revealed truth. Eather it implies that the Spirit, in
spite of the ignorance and resistance of the carnal mind, will bring men
to such a perception of the reality and importance of saving truth that
they will no longer resist its evidence. The meaning is, that He shall
convince men of something hitherto unknown ; and all the three members
of the sentence are linked together as follows: He shall convince men in
respect to the fact that they believe not on me ; in other words, He
will demonstrate to the mind that unbelief is a sin—yea, the greatest
sin ; He shall convince the world of righteousness in respect to the
fact that a true and proper righteousness has been wrought out for men
by Christ's suffering and death ; He shall convince the world of
judgment in respect to the fact that Satan has at the great tribunal
lost his cause, and is denuded of the right which he previously
possessed. The efficient cause of all these effects is the personal Holy
Ghost, the Comforter, and the Spirit of truth.

Christ's own words, as here recorded on the convincing

work of the Comforter, is the locus classicus to which all fitly turn,
whenever discussion is raised or inquiry awakened, as to the way in
which the Spirit applies redemption : " and ivlien He is come He will
convince the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment " (John
xvi. 8). As to the nature of that convincing influence which the Spirit
brings to bear upon the mind, several things come under our
consideration. He sets forth truth to the mind, and maintains it against
every prepossession or contrary opinion. The Holy Spirit, by the word
alone, or through the ministry of those who preach it, convinces the un
believing world by the prophecies of the Old Testament,— by the
testimonies of the New Testament,—by law and by gospel,—so fitly and
seasonably, that the unwilling are made willing, and compelled to feel
and to admit in their con science the truth of the gospel—an impression
which is followed by faith in the heart and confession with the mouth.
They are pressed by the force of truth, and yield. More particularly, He
convinces the mind in A THREEFOLD WAY, viz. that unbelief is the
greatest sin ; that the righteous ness procured by Christ is the only
righteousness which avails before God; and that all the right or claim
which Satan had to the possession of man, once his captive but now
redeemed, is so invalidated—because the process has been decided against
him—that he cannot tyrannize over any but by their own will.

Let me briefly notice the several objects in reference to which the
Spirit yields His convincing influence.

​1. The first object is UNBELIEF, the sin of contravening and rejecting
the proposals of the gospel. The Redeemer, the true interpreter of His
own words, subjoined what sin He meant when He added : " In respect to
the fact that they believe not on me." This explanation by the Lord
Himself refutes the opinion of Piscator and others, that the allusion is
to His crucifixion by the Jews, as well as another opinion,

that the expression must be generally understood of every sin committed.
These interpreters are all of the class who hold that the verb which we
render " convince" must have the meaning of " reprove," and will not
admit the exegetical or specifying force of the particle (ort), which we
have rendered " in respect to the fact that." But the Lord's meaning is
express, pointing to the sin of unbelief, which, abstractly considered,
is a violation of a divine command, and, concretely considered, is a
refusal to accept the merits of a divine Eedeemer.

To understand the criminality of unbelief, it may be remarked that it
contracts guilt from the law, as the latter pronounces condemnation
generally on all disobedience to the expressed will of God. The law may
be taken in a twofold way—that is, as having a general and a special
use. The first table of the law condemns generally all unbelief toward
the word of God, and charges it as sin.

To be more explicit, let me add that the gospel has its own rule in
reference to its own credenda, or things to be believed. There an object
of faith is presented to our view, with a special rule or mode divinely
prescribed for apprehending it; and, according to this rule, the man
must act who wishes to be saved. To that rule or mode many of the names
applied to faith are found to have respect. Thus it is called God's
commandment (1 John iii. 23), the way of righteousness (2 Pet. ii. 21),
the law of faith (Bom. iii. 27;, the work of God (John vi. 29), and
compliance with it is called obedience to the faith (Eom. i. 5). In all
these passages allusion is clearly made to that rule, way, or method by
which the blessings of redemption are applied and conferred. But, on the
contrary, he who contravenes that rule, and refuses to walk in that way,
incurs the guilt of disobedience. Not only so : when unbelief, which is
just an act in opposition to the tenor of the gospel, is persistently
and resolutely carried out, the law comes forth to fulminate against it.

M

The sin of unbelief is here described, with all the enormous guilt
attaching to it, as a rejection of the proposals of recon ciliation, as
the chief and the supreme sin, because a sin against the remedy,—as
sinful in itself, and as preventing the remission of all other sins. As
unbelief is the sin by eminence, it is upon this that the convincing
influence of the Spirit is mainly brought to bear.

Considered in its consequences, this sin of unbelief has its immediate
ground of condemnation in the fact that all other sins, original and
actual, with all their guilt, are remissible through faith in Christ.
But this sin involves the rejection of the graciously provided remedy;
and final unbelief has nothing to interpose between the sinner and
righteous con demnation. Hence Luther was wont to affirm that unbelief
alone condemns, since it makes the person evil and the works evil

The sin of unbelief is here described as if it were the only sin,
because, according to the happy remark of Augustin, while it continues,
all other sins are retained, and when it departs all other sins are
remitted. Not only so : it con stantly produces new sins. For, as faith
may be considered either as it apprehends Christ or as it works by love,
unbelief in like manner may be considered either as refusing Christ's
redeeming work, or as it works by sin against the conscience. Unbelief
may be called the mother sin, because it not only leaves all guilt
remaining, but gives force to reigning sins, and origin to a polluted
conscience. But however great and perilous this sin may be, such is the
ignorance in which men naturally are involved, that its criminality is
totally unknown till it is brought home by the CONVINCING INFLUENCE OF
THE HOLY GHOST the Comforter. Conscience may convince men of ordinary
sins, but never of the sin of unbelief. Of the enormity of this sin no
man was ever convinced but by the Holy Ghost Himself.

​2. The second object of which they are convinced is

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 179

RIGHTEOUSNESS, which is immediately after the former brought before the
mind in order to prevent despair. This expression must not be understood
as meaning that He who was crucified on the charge of sedition and
blasphemy is proved to be innocent and righteous. That interpretation is
supported by ingenious arguments, and specially by this, that God
vindicated His innocence by raising Him from the dead ; but it is by no
means suited to the context. For, when Christ promises the Comforter to
convince them of the sin of unbelief, He must be understood as meaning
unbelief as to His Messiahship and saving work, and not merely as to His
being a righteous man. The first clause presupposes that He is a
Saviour, and so must the second. .To convince the world of
righteousness, must mean that the Spirit gives convincing evidence, not
merely that His cause is good, and that He is innocent, but that in Him
is found the righteousness which the world needs, the imputed
righteousness which was graciously provided for us and becomes ours by
faith.

When it is added : He slwll convince tlu world of righteous ness, in
respect to the fact tlmt I go to the Father, and ye see me no more, we
see that the righteousness is equivalent to an obedience which
culminated in suffering and death, and not an infused righteousness, as
the Romanists allege; nor God's essential righteousness, as was alleged
by Osiander, and as is re-echoed by the modern Plymouthists.

According to the correct interpretation of Luther and the great divines
of the Lutheran Church, the meaning is: " By my departure—that is, by my
death and sufferings—a valid righteousness has been procured for all
true believers ;" for all the actions of Him who is by eminence the
Servant of the Lord are at once mediatorial and redeeming. The figure is
taken from a returning exile or traveller who has been from home; and in
this case from the end of that work of abase ment, or atonement and
expiation, for the completion of which He had come forth from the Father
(John xvi. 28).

The same style of language had been several times used before, not only
to the disciples (John xiii. 33), but on previous occasions to the Jews
(John vii. 34, viii. 21). This whole style of language presupposes a
commission or office to be discharged, a coming forth from the Father to
perform it, and a return with all the demonstrations of acceptance to
Him who sent Him. The language implies all Christ's offices, but
especially His meritorious work as the Servant of the Lord and the High
Priest of our profession (Heb. iii. 1). The additional words: "and ye
shall see me no more," are a mere supplement to the previous thought,
conveying little more than a filling up of the description by a
reference to the mental state of the disciples, who must needs prepare
themselves for losing that visible intercourse and that exchange of
thought and speech in which they had found their satisfaction. But the
appended phrase is a mere adjunct, and no constituent of the
righteousness such as the previous clause involves, the allusion being
merely to the apostles.

This language intimates that the righteousness which avails with God
consists not, as the Eomanist will have it, in that which is infused,
nor in the mere act of faith regarded as our obedience, as the Arminian
will have it,—but in His going to the Father by His meritorious and
atoning death. It implies that He who was sent on such an errand, and
who returned with all the tokens of cordial welcome and great reward,
must have brought in the everlasting righteousness and sealed up the
vision and prophecy (Dan. ix. 24). But of that righteousness the world
must be CONVINCED, if it is to be of any value to the sons of men. It
must be duly announced or testified by apostles orally and in writing,
and by the Holy Ghost the Comforter inwardly (John xv. 26, 27). Hence it
is said that the Holy Ghost is sent to convince the world of this
everlasting or imputed righteousness—that is, to show men that they who
are denuded of any proper righteous-

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 181

ness should, without delay, avail themselves of that which has magnified
the law and made it honourable.

​3. The third object of which the world is convinced by the Comforter is
JUDGMENT. This benefit stands very closely related to the former. The
righteousness which Christ acquired by His going to the Father, as
already ex plained, and which is applied by imputation to all them that
believe, puts them in a friendly relation to God, and God in a friendly
relation to them, because they are righteous in Christ's righteousness;
and this is the reason why our Lord immediately subjoins the mention of
judgment. In due order, and based upon the former, conies deliverance
from Satan.

As to the JUDGMENT here mentioned, it is not to be inter preted as
meaning the authority which Christ, as victor over Satan, and accepted
Surety, wields as supreme Lord of heaven and earth. That view, embodying
a precious truth, is too general here, and misses the point of the
clause, though held by Chrysostom, Cyrill, Piscator, and many recent
commenta tors. Obviously, the import of the words does not refer to what
is deposited in Christ as a potentate, able to disarm the strong man
armed, but to what was inflicted on Satan, when the cause which was
before the supreme tribunal for final adjudication was decided against
him. The work of the second Adam, satisfying every claim of law and
justice, terminated Satan's right, and reversed his authority acquired
by conquest. We are led to this conclusion, as in the two previous
clauses, by the exegetical or specifying particle (6'rt), which must
still have the same meaning, and only declare what had been yet but
obscurely expressed. It is but one thing, only more fully declared. It
is not statement and reason of the statement, as given in the English
Authorized Version. The meaning is as follows : He shall convince the
world of judg ment in respect to the fact that the prince of the world
has been judged. The use of the perfect passive (/ceK/omu) intimates

that it was within a few hours—that it was as good as done, —a mode of
speech l\>y no means uncommon in our Lord's style (see John xii. 31).
The meaning is, that Satan has been judged in the sense that the great
cause has gone against him, and that he has no more right to retain the
world, which he previously held by right of conquest.

What is THIS WORLD, and who is its prince ? It is not the fabric of the
universe, which God created, upholds, and rules ; but the world of men
seduced by the tempter, and held by a certain claim of right; his
subjects and his sons doing the lusts of their father (Eph. ii. 2 ; John
viii. 44). The phraseology is borrowed from a legal proceeding carried
on by two contending parties—Satan, on the one side, con tending that he
had a right of property in men who had become his subjects; that a rebel
cannot be restored to favour, but must be left in his hands; that the
highly extolled rectitude of the supreme Judge must carry out the same
sentence on men that had been carried out, and was for ever to be
carried out, on himself;—the Mediator, on the other side, appealing to
the fact that, as He took man's place under the broken law to fulfil its
obligations and bear its penalty in their room, justice as well as mercy
required that Satan's right of conquest should be reversed, and the
world given to Him who was its second Adam and Lord of all. Such was the
cause to be finally and irrevocably decided, and, on the ground of
Christ's satisfaction and sufficient ransom, the adjudication was
rightfully decided against the prince of this world, who was to be cast
out of his dominions and compelled to surrender the world—that is, the
human family—into other hands. He can no longer keep his goods in peace
when the stronger than he appears upon the scene (Luke xi. 21 ; Isa.
xlix. 24 ; 1 Cor. xv. 54). Of all this, THE HOLY GHOST THE COMFORTER
COMES TO CON VINCE THE HEARERS OF THE GOSPEL, to whom the apostles
testified (John xv. 26, 27). Men are thus convinced that

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 183

they may be free indeed (John viii. 36), no more subjects of the
tempter, no more bound to obey him, but loyal subjects of Christ, and
made willing in a day of His power (Ps. ex. 3).

As to the issue of this convincing process, exegetes are by no means at
one. Many who are correct in expounding the term " convince " assume
unwarrantably a twofold result, and assert that it may sometimes end in
the obdurate mind and sometimes in saving faith. Even Calvin arrives at
the conclusion, that under the term WORLD may be comprehended an
allusion to hypocrites and reprobates as well as to those who are truly
to be converted. Tholuck, after putting-together a variety of opinions,
comes to no firm decision. On the other hand, practical writers and
preachers, weighing the passage in its bearings upon religious
experience, come, for the most part, to the conclusion that the result
of this convincing process ends in true conversion. I cannot but regard
that as the only true and legitimate interpretation.

As so much uncertainty prevails, I have gone into a full consideration
of this passage, with all the light reflected from the history of
interpretation, believing that this was by no means unnecessary. My full
persuasion is, that THE CON VINCING PROCESS OF THE SPIRIT, thus
described by Christ in the last evening of His intercourse with the
disciples, is so put as to bring out the successive steps, or the order
of salva tion, through which the Spirit leads the awakened mind; and
that we can only view it as issuing in a sound conver sion. I hold that
it means to convince by clear and cogent arguments. It brings the ruin
and the remedy together. It is a thunderbolt against all the views of
Legalists.

We shall next consider Christ's testimony to the blasphemy or sin
against the Holy Ghost. " lV7wsoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it
shall not "be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to
come" (Matt. xii. 32). On the occasion of healing a demoniac, the
Pharisees wished to

invalidate the proof of Christ's divine mission by the allega tion that
the miracle was not performed by the finger of God, but by Beelzebul,
the prince of the devils. "Without explicitly stating that they had
committed, or were commit ting, the sin against the Holy Ghost, He gives
them a solemn warning that there is a sin against the Holy Ghost which
is unpardonable. He speaks absolutely of an irremissible sin; for all
other sin can be remitted on the ground of Christ's satisfaction through
faith and repentance. But with the solemnity of an oath by Himself, as
the " verily verily" indicates, He declares that this sin has no
forgiveness.

As to the nature of this sin against the Holy Ghost, it is shrouded in a
certain mystery, but it is neither calculated nor intended to give
perplexity to any Christian mind. It may be difficult to define it; and
the most conflicting opinions were entertained among the ancient
Fathers, and downwards from the Reformation times. Thus Tertullian,
Hilary, and other Fathers maintained that the sin against the Spirit
meant blasphemy, not against the human nature of Christ, which is
pardonable, but against His divine nature, which is unpardon able.
Cyprian explained it of apostasy, or the denial of Christ, and
consequently held that the lapsed could scarcely, if at all, be
forgiven. Origen expounded the passage of those sins which are committed
subsequent to baptism. But these essentially Novatian comments, when
fully carried out, come into collision with the Creed, which declares: "
I believe in the forgiveness of sins." Athanasius is not consistent with
himself. "We may perhaps distribute the vast variety of interpretations
scattered over the works of expositors, and over the theological systems
of divines, into the three following classes:—

​1. Those which virtually make it a sin possible only when Christ was
among men in the exercise of His personal ministry. Chrysostom and
Jerome explain it as if our Lord meant to say: he that speaks against
the Son of man, regard-

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 185

ing Him as nothing more than man, may obtain forgiveness; but he who
ascribes these miracles to Satan, while discerning in them the
indications of divine power, shall never be for given ; for this is the
unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, by whom Christ performed His
mighty deeds. Pfaff and Klinkenberg, in last century, strongly asserted
that interpretation.

​2. Another view propounded by Augustin makes the sin against the Holy
Ghost equivalent to final impenitence. A very large class of writers in
all ages have held this view as the simplest and least complicated. The
followers of Melanchthon in the Lutheran Church, many of our Scotch
divines,—such as Guthrie in his Trial of a Saving Interest, Chalmers,
and others,—as well as writers in all countries who have followed
Augustin, have accepted this comment as the best.

​3. Calvin, dissenting from Augustin's view because it seemed not to do
justice to the peculiar expression, that this sin shall not be forgiven
either in this world or in that which is to come, held that it is
resistance to the truth conjoined with malice, though the evidence in
behalf of the truth of the Christian faith was such as rendered it
impossible to plead ignorance. The thought is supposed to be, that this
sin is committed before the close of life, and while the person has
still a period to live in this world. And it is alleged that the
distinguishing mark of this sin is conscious resistance or deliberate
opposition to conclusive evidence supplied by the Spirit of God. The men
who commit this sin are thought to be convinced of the truth of the
Christian religion, and yet oppose and blaspheme it, not so much from
sudden passion and the force of temptation, as from wilful malice. It is
argued that while God gives pardon to all manner of sin through the
exercise of faith and repentance, the sin against the Holy Ghost is
unique and irremissible, because conscious resistance is present to the
mind, and because the voluntary

denial of divine truth is combined with hatred and malice. This opinion
of Calvin was adopted with a very general consent by the subsequent
divines of the Reformed Church. If I were to adduce a catena of Reformed
divines, they would be found almost uniformly to follow Calvin's
opinion, and frequently with an exaggerated statement both of the extent
of a gracious work of the Spirit on such minds, and of the almost
Satanic character of their conscious resistance. This comes out in such
writers as Maresius, Maestricht, Cocceius, Hoornbeck, and others.

One guiding principle, however, against excess of statement is supplied
by the fact that the evidence furnished by the Spirit, and resisted by
those who so sin against Him, is ONLY

HIS TESTIMONY, not HlS WORK ON THE HEART; for (1) the

latter is irresistible; and (2) he that hath begun a good work will
perform it. Whatever evidence is brought to bear on the mind, it is but
rational conviction derived from testimony, not the efficacious change
of heart. And this enables us to draw a line between the Lutheran and
Reformed exposition of this topic. The Lutheran exposition holds that
only the regenerate are guilty of the sin against the Holy Ghost. So
Gerhard, Balduin, Hiilsemanu, Quenstedt, and all their eminent divines
speak. On the contrary, the canons of the Synod of Dort, giving as they
do the most admirably correct expression of all the doctrines of special
grace, include among the errors which are to be rejected, the opinion
that the regenerate may be guilty of this sin.

It is commonly held that this is the same sin that is referred to by the
sacred writers in those other passages of Scripture (Heb. vi. 4-G, x. 29
; 1 John v. 10). It is true Athanasius, Basil, Jerome do not regard
these passages in the Epistle to the Hebrews and in John as referring to
the sin against the Holy Ghost. Calvin says: " The apostle agrees with
the Master."

I have given the principal opinions on this unpardonable

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 187

sin, and endeavoured to distribute them into three classes. For my own
part, I incline to Augustin's opinion; at all events, I am convinced
that the notion of FINAL IMPENITENCE must be taken along with us as a
main element in any opinion which may be adopted or maintained on this
subject.

The Spirit inhabits and replenishes all the mental powers, and supplies
them with the help which makes them fit for active service. Discussions
have long been carried on as to the relation and priority of the
understanding and will, and as to the influence which the one may be
regarded as exercising on the other. Without complicating our inquiry,
as is too frequently done, both on the Calvinistic and Arminian side,
with discussions which yield no satisfactory result as to the priority
of the understanding and its neces sary influence on the will, we may
better describe the change which is effected by regeneration as taking
effect ON ALL THE POWERS OF THE SOUL, and as underlying the exercise of
them all. We consider it as displaying its various modes of activity, as
so many phenomena in the compass of all the several faculties in all
that constitutes the truly Christian life; and we would rather speak of
what is natural and intelligible, viz. of the entire soul found in
various conditions and moods, than separate the mental powers into so
many divisions or compart ments, each acting upon the other, and opening
the gateway for the other. If the entire soul is a unity and only found
in certain states of mind, as Witsius was wont to represent it in
theology, and as Brown was wont to represent it in philosophy, we may
more fitly describe the Spirit's operations as taking effect on the
whole soul, than limit ourselves to one faculty acting on another.

The restoration of the Spirit takes for granted that He comes in TO
INHABIT THE WHOLE MAN, according to the idea of anthropology, with which
all Scripture is replete, and becomes anew for us the indefectible
source of light and life and fruit-fulness, as well as of perseverance
and progressive holiness.

The allusions to the inhabitation of the Spirit are manifold and
various. As a new impelling power, He occupies the human faculties, and
so pervades them that He is said to dwell in us and walk in us (2 Cor.
vi. 16) ; and the regenerate man is said to HAVE the Spirit of Christ as
the consequence of that gracious inhabitation. The Spirit condescends to
occupy all the chambers of our hearts, and to dwell in them.

We may trace the Spirit's work on THE MENTAL POWERS, and show that there
is a divine influence decisive as to the action of them all. A single
glance at the Spirit's operation on the understanding, will, and
conscience, will suffice to show that, in the case of the regenerate,
the Holy Spirit is

\* O \</ i.

the efficient cause of all their spiritual activity.

With regard to the UNDERSTANDING, all spiritual light is derived from
the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the know ledge of the Lord Jesus
enlightening the eyes of their under standing (Eph. i. 17). When the
question is raised, Does the illumination belong solely to prevenient
grace ? it is necessary to distinguish. In the first act of
illumination, the Spirit acts much in the same way as when He commanded
it to shine out of darkness (2 Cor. iv. 6). But when the man has
received the power of vision, he uses it for the further increase of his
knowledge in the way of co-operating grace. The truths which he believed
to the saving of the soul had reference to God, to himself, and to the
adaptation of the atonement. By the illumination of the Spirit, he
acquires wholly different views of all these points and of God, who is
no longer regarded as an indulgent being, nor as a tyrant, but as a
gracious Father, all whose perfections are glorified by the atonement.
And as to ourselves, He shows us the ruin and the remedy.

The Spirit's operation is not less conspicuous on the WILL. The
principal effect of the Spirit's activity is seen in a new principle of
spiritual life diffused through all the mental powers, and inclining the
soul to yield itself to Christ in the

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 189

exercise of faith and subjection, as now enabled or made fit both to
will and to do.

And as to the CONSCIENCE, the sanctification of the Spirit contributes
to a good conscience. In other words, the con science purged with the
sprinkling of the blood of Christ by the effectual application of the
Spirit, is committed to the Spirit, who corrects and teaches it, who
purifies and comforts it, from day to day.

​II. The effectually called become ADOPTED SONS, and are translated by
the power of the Spirit into the family of God, according to the canon,
that whatever is imparted in the exercise of Christ's grace implies the
opposite in our state by nature, they who were born into God's family
were in the opposite family—in the family of Satan—before.

It is the more necessary to set this in its proper light, because many
do not hesitate to say, under the bias of a false system, that God is
universal Father, and that all men are His children. They hold THE
FATHERHOOD OF GOD in virtue of an alleged unbroken relation formed by
creation, and that all men, without exception or distinction, belong to
the family of God, much in the same way as Pope expresses it in his
universal prayer. Children, forsooth, who only disobey and dishonour
their Father ! No: all men by nature belong to a family antagonistic to
the family of God, and do the lusts of a father described as a liar and
murderer from the beginning. That is a position in harmony with the
doctrine of Christ and His apostles. Men cannot, at one and the same
moment, be of their father the devil, as Cain was (1 John iv. 10—12),
and as the Jews were, when our Lord declared to them their family (John
viii. 44), and be recognised or called the sons of God. The whole
doctrine of our Lord and His apostles sets forth that sinners and all
unregenerate men are children of the evil one.

Though the doctrine of human depravity was not represented by the early
Christian writers, especially of the

Greek Church, with all the accuracy with which they were delineated in
after times, it must be admitted that these early writers speak of men
as subjected to the evil power with a Biblical fulness and accuracy to
which modern theology can make no pretensions. They lay emphasis on THE
POWER OF SATAN. The representations given in the early Christian
literature as to the sinful power under which the human race lias
fallen, may be described as greatly more full and sugges tive than in
the literature of the present day. "With regard to Satan that is
emphatically true. AVith the Christian Church in post-apostolic times
Satan was a reality, and his kingdom a fact, with which they daily felt
themselves encompassed. The Fathers cannot find terms sufficiently
strong to delineate the power of Satan, the seductive influence which he
wields, and the subjection to his dominion under which men have fallen.
In a word, the Patristic literature gives the utmost prominence to the
terrible power and tyranny of Satan, though by no means greater than the
subject warrants; and this subjection is always traced to sin. There is
no disposition with them to shrink from representing men as children of
the wicked one.

In the translation of the individual from the one family to the other,
it must be borne in mind that the Spirit is repre sented in Scripture as
the great agent. He makes Christ and His people one, for the acceptance
of their persons and the renovation of their natures. I refer to this
the rather because there are schools of theology which make the work of
the Spirit and the commencement of His operations subsequent to the
believing reception of Christ; and many, under the spell of a theory
from which they never escape, make the participation of the Redeemer's
work turn in the last resort on the self-application of the individual;
and setting out from the universal call of the gospel, they look with
suspicion on any express allusion either to human inability or to the
effectual applica tion of the Spirit. But the language of Scripture in
reference

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 191

to this application is so express as to leave no room for a moment's
hesitation. Thus, if we consider any aspect of the question, the Spirit
is said to shed abroad the love of God upon the heart, which must be
taken as the decisive turning-point in that application (Eom. v. 5). The
Holy Spirit is designated " the Spirit of adoption,"—a phrase which,
accord ing to the analogy supplied by every similar expression, means
that He is the author of the adoption (Eom. viii. 15). The Holy Spirit
is the efficient cause in communicating the bless ings of redemption ;
for the merits of Christ and the efficacy of the Spirit are placed
together in the inseparable connection which follows: " But ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the
Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our God" (1 Cor. vi. 11). When the
gospel pro duces saving effects, it is said to come not in word only,
but in power, and in the Holy Ghost (1 Thess. i. 5). The sancti-fication
of the Spirit is inserted by Paul and Peter as the intermediate link
between election on the part of God and faith on the part of man (2
Thess. ii. 13). The Apostle Peter declares that men are chosen by the
separation which the Spirit produces to the belief of the truth and to
the sprinkling of the blood of Christ (1 Pet. i. 2). But there is one
title of the Spirit which is peculiarly significant and suggestive in
this light— THE SPIRIT OF FAITH ; that is, the author of faith (2 Cor.
iv. 13), by whom we call Jesus Lord, and confide in Him. The conclusion
to which we come, from these testimonies, is, that in the application of
redemption there is but one great agent,—not the force of human will,
according to the semi-Pelagian opinion,—not a double factor, according
to the Synergistic theory. The sole cause is the Holy Spirit operating
through the word—that is, by the pro clamation of law and gospel by
which He enlightens the understanding, and inclines the will to receive
Christ's finished work.

The ADOPTION OF SONS, into which Christians are ushered

by the Spirit (Rom. viii. 15), differs from the privilege of
justification in this respect, that it brings the Christian before God
in the new relation of a child to a father. Whether we regard this state
of sonship, with many divines, as one of the sides of justification, or
as a further privilege into which the believer passes without any
interval of time, THE ADOPTION OF SONS (vtoOearla) is, in a doctrinal
point of view, of the utmost moment in the organism of divine truth,
because it preserves the equipoise, and prevents the juridical idea from
being exclusive. As it is set forth by the apostles, we find adoption in
THREE several delineations : (I) Paul describes the privilege of sons as
contrasted with the position of a servant (Gal. iv. 7); (2) John
describes adoption in connection with regeneration, and with the
underlying truth that we are made sons by grace because Christ is the
Son by nature (John i. 13 ; 1 John iii. 1) ; (3) the Synoptists,
preserving our Lord's words, describe adoption in connection with the
restoration of the divine image (Matt. v. 45). We have only to put
together that threefold description of the apostles as the complement of
each other, to give an exhaustive outline of the whole doctrine of
adoption.

The justified person, passing into the relation of a son, enters into a
relation of love, which we shall delineate in a few particulars. (1) The
foundation of sonship is based in the incarnation of the eternal Son,
who became the Son of man, and partaker of flesh and blood, that His
people might become the sons of God. It is not some merely imvard change
produced by the operations of the Spirit that the Father loves; He,
loves them in His Son, and extends to them the same complacency and
favour which rest on Him. This is the great objective ground of their
adoption and of their joint participation of that love wherewith He
loves the Son, as far as a created being, in virtue of the federal and
vital union, can share it. (2) The receptive hand by which Christians
are made partakers of sonship and joint participants of the

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 193

Holy Ghost, according to their measure, is FAITH, and the accompanying
union which true faith involves. (3) The adoption common to believers,
and essentially the same in all, has no varying degrees, but one equal
degree wherever it is found, and it is perfect at once. " Now are we the
sons of God" (1 John iii. 2). Hence no warrant exists for the opinion
that there are distinctions or varying degrees in the love of God to His
adopted children so far as this objective privilege is concerned ; for
on each of them rests that divine complacency which rests on the
only-begotten Son. This adoption carries with it demonstrations of
divine love, pledges of paternal care and salutary discipline, as well
as foretastes of glory, honour, and immortality, and conformity to the
image of Him who is the first-born among many brethren. (4) It is a
privilege about which the Christian, replenished by the Holy Spirit, is
to be left in no uncertainty and doubt, for the Spirit makes
intercession with groanings that cannot be uttered, and bears witness
with our spirit that we are the children of God (Bom. viii. 16). On this
central point of Biblical doctrine many divines expatiate, some in one
interest, some in another, in order, if possible, to find a remedy for
those controversies and debates that have long been carried on as to the
matter of a sinner's acceptance. Thiersch, in the erudite lectures in
which he discusses the principles of Catholicism and Protestantism,
speaks of this doctrine as furnishing a sort of meeting-point, and
proposes an irenicum on this basis of agreement. He goes so far as to
say that the Romish doctrine, antagonistic to the position that all
believers are equally accepted on the ground of the Redeemer's merits,
is really met by this doctrine of adoption as a common basis of
agreement.

The doctrine of assurance, or the witness of the Spirit, connected with
the adoption of sons, demands a few words of exposition (Rom. viii. 16).
This witness is spoken of as the well-known accompaniment of adoption.
And as the result

N

of the Holy Spirit's operations, we cannot suppose that the testimony of
the Spirit, of which the Apostle Paul speaks, was AN EXTRAORDINARY
INWARD REVELATION, imparted only to apostles and to a few specially
selected individuals of the apostolic age, as Romish divines are in the
habit of affirming, but as a common Christian experience. It is not an
excep tional gift, but the ordinary criterion and accompaniment of
adoption. The notion, however, that he is no true Christian who does not
enjoy an ever-shining assurance, as an unclouded sun in the firmament,
has as little to say in its defence. The possibility of attaining
assurance, and the duty of possessing it (potcst d dcbct\\ must be
inculcated. But beyond that we are not warranted to go, and may not
presume to go.

The subject of assurance was so identified with faith in the theology of
the Reformation as to be well-nigh inseparable and indistinguishable;
and the Puritan doctrine may be called an advance to a clearer view.
While these divines carefully distinguished it from faith, they
contended that, in God's design, and according to the constitution of
things, assurance could neither be retained in an unholy walk, nor
emerge upon the consciousness apart from the Spirit's testimony and the
renovated will. While they directed the eye of faith to the
all-sufficiency of the Redeemer in a way not differing from the
Reformers, they suspended assurance neither upon joyous emotions of
acceptance alone, nor on the immediate revelation of the Spirit alone,
irrespective of the graces of the new creation. And in one of the most
precious chapters of the Confession, they have set forth their
conclusion. In their day they furnished a corrective to an excess. An
equally great defect required to be supplied in the following century,
of which Warburton was a representative divine, when it was necessary to
exhibit assurance as an incumbent duty, and as a benefit productive of
higher holiness and deeper love, as well as of a consecrated life. Venn
represents it as one great cause of Wesley's success, that he urged

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 195

Christians not to rest without joy in God from receiving the atonement.

I cannot omit to notice, in this connection, the fact that, according to
the uniform testimony of history, all success in extending religion, and
in promoting its revival, has been always connected with dependence on
the Spirit of life, and that the refusal to regard the Spirit as the
author of conver sion and the source of spiritual life, puts a Church or
an individual beyond the pale of the truly Christian. Such a religion
has no claim to be classed among evangelical com munions. A religion not
acting in the Spirit as the principle of action, can only be the
religion of nature. The essential feature of Christianity, according to
our Lord's own delinea tion, is the new birth ; and so indispensable is
it, that with out the new nature there can be no evangelical health or
progress, nor any interest in Christ and in the blessings of His
purchase.

To go back to the Lutheran type of doctrine,—the eldest daughter of the
Eeformation,—we find that this Church was well-nigh stranded when the
Synergistic controversy took its rise within her pale. Whoever has
bestowed any attention on that discussion, is aware that nothing but the
profound views already lodged in the mind of the Christian community on
the vast ruin of the fall, and on the indispensable necessity of the
efficacious grace of the Holy Spirit, at that time saved the life of the
Church. The majority maintained, agreeably to Scripture, that the
natural man, apart from what the Holy Spirit does in Him, can do
absolutely nothing, and that he needs to be replenished by the Spirit of
life. The Church righted again by adopting the position that the subject
of conversion cannot also lie a co-operating factor, and that the sole
cause of conversion and faith is the Holy Spirit working through the
word—that is, as giving a full proclamation of law and gospel. Ko
Protestant Confession has assigned any agency for the human will as a
THIRD CAUSE ; for to do so were

to fall into the logical absurdity of confounding the subject of
conversion with its cause. To show the dangers of Synergism, we quote a
sentence from a German writer : " This article," says he, 1 " did not
fail to exercise a leavening influence both in a forward and backward
direction,—backward, on the doctrine of original sin; forward, on that
of justification." We believe that this is the inevitable consequence,
as a few words will show.

With regard to the first, the doctrine of ORIGINAL SIN, it is obvious
that a theory which asserts a synergism, and by this means qualifies the
sole operation of the Holy Spirit, does not presuppose a human nature
which is subjected to such a moral change as is seen in the issue of the
fall. The rationale of every gospel doctrine, and, in a particular
manner, of the Spirit's operations, is furnished by clear discoveries as
to the extent of inherent depravity. And to assume a doctrine of
original sin less than coextensive with the essential powers of the
soul,—though it has left that essence undestroyed, and still capable of
extrication from the ruin,—is to neutralize the provisions of the Holy
Spirit's work.

Not only so; the effect of synergistic views on man's JUSTIFICATION by
imputed righteousness is not less disastrous. It is an attempt, as
futile as foolish, to accept a surety-righteous ness and repudiate a
surety-strength, exercised upon man by the omnipotent efficacy of the
Holy Spirit, when not an argu ment can be adduced against the one but
may equally be directed against the other. And hence Luther said, with
his iisual vehemence: " What need of God, what need of Christ, what need
of the Spirit, if free-will can accomplish all ?" The entire success in
the last resort is made to hinge on the individual himself.

With others in this age, and they are a very numerous class, all the
application of redemption is resolved into the exercise of natural power
as the effect of mere moral suasion. 1 Schuliring in Rudelbach's
Zeltschriftfiir Luthfrische Theologie, 1848, p. 316.

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 197

The man is thrown back on himself. It seems to exalt and flatter man's
nature, but it paves the way for its deeper degradation. Here I may
notice that Amyraldus has been followed by not a few in the unhappy
distinction which he drew between the physical and moral ability to
believe in Christ. He asserted that man had the former, though he had
not the latter. That notion of ability, copiously imported into America,
gave rise to many ill-considered state ments which can only be received
with caution. Whatever system leaves human nature as it is, to make the
best of its resources, or to be wrought upon merely by a class of
motives, though the most sublime, but which introduce no new element
into fallen humanity, is as little Christian in its essence as it is
stale and flat in its conception. If man's soul is not to be elevated
from its degradation by the regenerating grace of the Spirit, which
alone can raise it, but flattered with its ability and power,—if nothing
but a class of motives, higher indeed than Plato's, but yet mere
motives, is brought to bear upon it, no high conception is formed of the
trans forming influence of Christianity. That system of moral suasion
often imposes on its own advocates: it seems so con structed as to avoid
the outward appearance of Pelagianism, because it limits the view merely
to the matter of accepting salvation as a gift. But it is only in
appearance, and not in essence, that it evades the grosser form of
Pelagianism, by limiting the language to the reception of a gift. Thus,
while there are schools of theology, such as the Puritans and
Jansenists, which have endeavoured to vindicate the spiritual life as a
reality, the views in question contribute directly, and not in their
remote effect, to obliterate all the distinction between spirit and
flesh, grace and nature. Of the fruits of Naturalism, under whatever
form it appears, whether it be Pelagianism, Arminianism, Socinianism,
Rationalism, we have seen enough in the history of the Church to be
convinced that it does not tend, with all its high praise of man's
ability

and dignity, to elevate our race. If all good flows from the Spirit of
God, down to the very first desire, then dependence and prayer
constitute the only fitting attitude.

The leading principle which helps us to find our way through all the
difficulties of these questions is, that THE SPIRIT, in His return to
the human heart, ANTICIPATES THE WILL —that is, works in us to will, at
the first moment of conversion and at every subsequent step. The first
desire, wish, or resolution to return to God, as well as the first
prayer offered with this end in view, is from the Holy Spirit. That all
spiritual good emanates from the Spirit of God, is a simple formula,
which keeps every inquirer in this depart ment right. That the Spirit's
power and grace precede the will is a maxim to be carried with us,
unless we are prepared to ascribe a merit to the first step, or to view
the first step as originated on the man's own side.

And from the moment that the soul begins to act in spiritual things, it
acts with its newly acquired spiritual powers, imparted by the Spirit of
God. The Spirit's opera tion, always spoken of in the present tense, and
as prevenient grace, prompts the soul to co-operate with its newly
acquired powers of life. But the expression SPIRITUAL POWERS does not
imply a change on man's essential nature, or the donation of faculties
which were never found in the human mind before, but simply a new
aptitude and power to comply with what is truly good, as derived from
the Holy Spirit. With a new will, that is, a will renovated and endowed
with a spiritual capacity, the soul becomes active, and co-operates with
God.

We have thus seen that the application of redemption is from first to
last by the Holy Spirit; that the faith by which we receive the adoption
of sons is the first point; and that this faith in man's heart is only
from the Spirit of God, which is the second point. If there be admitted
any natural power or capacity in man for the exercise of faith, this
necessarily overthrows in the second instance the great doctrine of
divine

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 199

grace that was announced in the first. This doctrine of the Spirit,
therefore, really maintains, more than anything else, a Church's
connection with evangelical religion; and where this is wanting, nothing
can intercept or arrest a Church's descent to the lowest depths of
naturalism. The Wesleyan system, when it diverged from the path which
Whitfield continued to maintain, imbibed most of the Arminian tenets;
but it was rescued from the irreparable ruin that had otherwise awaited
it by the fact that it unequivocally recognised the Holy Spirit as the
sole author of regeneration and of spiritual life ; for Wesley said with
unhesitating decision : " There is no more of power than of merit in
man; but as all merit is in the Son of God, so all power is in the
Spirit of God; and therefore every man, in order to believe unto
salvation, must receive the Holy Ghost." They conceded too much as to
the extent of the Spirit's operations, but they retained what was
essential to spiritual life. But the theology that contemplates nothing
higher than moral suasion and free-will, and which repudiates the
supernatural, is necessarily divested of all evangelical power as well
as of all permanence and strength. The current objection to the Spirit's
work, that man must have inherent strength to believe, because divine
wrath rests on those who do not believe, is but a plausible sophism. If
it had any meaning, it would be as applicable to the law as to faith,
and to the work of Christ as \\vell as to the work of the Spirit. If a
man must have power in the one case, he must have power in the other
case. He who vindicates the Mediator's work against the sceptic or
Deist, cannot without the most flagrant inconsistency take Pelagian
ground against the Spirit's work. There is not an argument against the
one that is not equally capable of being directed against the other, and
he who rejects the one is bound in consistency to reject the other.
There is as little interference with human liberty in receiving the work
of the Spirit to regenerate, as in receiv ing the work of the Son to
redeem and justify.

The loss of the Spirit and the restoration of the Spirit— the former the
result of the fall, and the latter the result of the atonement—have thus
passed before us in review. They are the two most momentous facts in the
history of man. They are associated with the first man's sin and the
second man's reparation. The fall left the human heart, once the temple
of God, an utter ruin, because the Great Inhabitant who dwelt in it was
under the necessity of leaving the polluted spot. With the Spirit's
return to the human heart, on the ground of that everlasting
righteousness which Christ ushered in, a new creation began to dawn, and
a new kingdom entered which will be dissolved no more. It is of little
use —except for the analogy—to recall what might have been had the first
Adam fulfilled the conditions imposed on him by his Creator. The human
race would have enjoyed without forfeiture the irrevocable aid and
presence of the Holy Spirit beyond the hazards of falling. And the same
constant presence of the Spirit, with all the efficacy of His omnipotent
grace, which the redeemed will for ever enjoy, would have been
transmitted to his descendants of the human family upon a tenure liable
to no disastrous forfeiture.

The Lord Jesus, the second man, having fulfilled all the conditions
which devolved on Him as the Surety of those whom the Father had given
Him, conveys to each of them a supply of the Holy Spirit irrevocably
sure and indefectible. The ground of that supply is that the second Adam
stood; and in consequence of His finished work, they who are effectually
united to Him shall never finally forfeit the Spirit's communications.
While many grounds and reasons may be mentioned why Christ's disciples
never fall away, the principal ground, based at once on divine law and
justice, is that the second Adam, by fulfilling the conditions, and com
plying with all the requirements of the law, received as His reward an
inexhaustible supply of the Spirit, which should be imparted to all His
people, and dwell in them for ever. The

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 201

Spirit, accordingly, never permits them finally to depart. He will not
abandon the souls which He has regenerated, and which He will use
effectual means to reclaim when they are ready, from inward feebleness
or listless indifference, to vacillate or waver. He will not suffer them
to depart for ever, but will renew the exercises of repentance and faith
so that they will return to their allegiance (Isa. lix. 21), and
continue to have the place of sons in the family of God. The great work
of the Spirit, with a view to adoption, is union to Christ, which in an
objective point of view constitutes them the sons of God. According to
semi-Pelagian theories, the first good begins with the man, and the
Spirit of God is only a benevolent wellwisher, but no Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus. The real deed, and not the vague desire, begins on man's
side, though he is described as " dead in sin" The grand evil of all
these systems is, that they insert a legal condition which men have to
perform, and all ends at last in the law of works, leaving men to apply
to themselves as they best may the benefits which the Eedeemer
purchased. Humanity is thrown back, under a goodly guise, upon the
principle— DO AND LIVE. And whether it be the influence of hope or fear,
whatever imposes on man an obligation to act from himself as the
principle of action, is legal in its inmost germ, and enmity to God—how
ever concealed under an ostentatious attachment to grace in a one-sided
way. In these systems the gift of salvation is not given to the man, but
to his strenuous self-application. But if the application in the last
instance rests on man's inherent power, he inevitably relies on his
reliance, or believes in his belief; and no exercise of ingenuity can
extricate him from the vortex of legalism. So much was Luther persuaded
of the legalism of all this, that in his treatise on the Bondage of the
Will, in answer to Erasmus, his whole reasoning assumes that it is a
mockery to present the finished work of Christ to men who are taught
that they possess inherent power } as this undermines the whole.

The full development of these systems appears in preaching A DEAD FAITH.
And their naturalistic tendency expresses itself in the assertion that
they do not know a wrong faith, and that there are not two ways of
believing. On the contrary, the Bible speaks of a dead faith. The
confessions of the Reformation, drawn from Scripture, delineate faith as
a new religious principle of life, awakened by the Holy Spirit with out
man's active aid. It is an instructive fact that some of the old
Lutheran divines, in their apprehension lest an element of works should
be introduced into our title, objected at one time to the designation "
living faith;" but it is said that not one now exists that does not
solemnly abjure the error. And no reflecting mind can fail to see that
faith must exist as an implanted habit, or grace of the Holy Spirit in
apprehending the Saviour as our righteousness; and very evidently it
never docs or can exist without thus apprehending Clirist. Hence in all
the systems above delineated, in harmony with the dead faith which is
propounded, there is uniformly a painful want of reference to the
personal Redeemer. They allude to an object in the past in formal
contrast with a present object; they preach a salvation in abstract
separation from His Person, and as little connected with Him as if He
had never risen. Calvin says: Such a separation of Christ from His
Spirit makes Him like a dead image or corpse. 1

That man owes his entire renovation to the effectual opera tion of the
Holy Spirit, is evident enough from what has been already said. Any
synergism or co-operation on man's side in the first instance would
necessarily presuppose the ex istence of powers and faculties in order
to that co-operation. But in the explicit statements of Scripture man is
represented as impotent, nay, dead in trespasses and sins (Eph. ii. 1);
thus rendering co-operative action toward his own resuscitation

1 On Rom. viii. 10, Calvin says : "Christum a splritu suo qui divellunt,
eum faciunt mortuo simulacra vel cadaueri similem."

THE SPIRIT'S REGENERATING WORK ON THE INDIVIDUAL. 203

impossible, and only an absurd idea. On the contrary, the Scripture
emphatically describes the divine action of the Spirit as working in us
to will and to do (Phil. ii. 13). But whether He works in us to will, or
subsequently works with tis when we are enabled to will, the entire
glory of regenera tion and of conversion belongs to the Spirit of God.
There is no middle ground, no intermediate stage between death and life,
between conversion and non-conversion; for the origin of spiritual life
must be instantaneous. It is compared to creation (Ps. li. 10; Eph. ii.
10); it is compared to resurrec tion (Eph. i. 19). The man who is the
subject of the change is the party on whom creative omnipotence acts, to
the ex clusion of all mental preparations on man's side,—for he is only
receptive,—and all merits of congruity of every description.

LECTURE V.

ON TIIK SPIRIT OF HOLINESS.

X our last lecture we discussed the Spirit's work on the individual,
with special reference to the way and mode of His return to the human
heart and to the application of redemption. By way of transition to the
topic which will now occupy attention, let me recall the inseparable con
nection between the work of Christ FOR us and the work of the Spirit IN
us—a connection which it is of the utmost moment for sound theology as
well as practical religion habitually to apprehend. It is a connection
of cause and effect, or of merit and reward. It is in express terms set
forth in such passages as the sixth, seventh, and eighth chapters of the
Epistle to the Romans, where, in every variety of form, the apostle
declares that the link between the justification of the man and the
sanctiiication of his nature is of a kind as close and inseparable as
that by which God connected Christ's atoning death and His resurrection
to a premial life. The link between the two is secured not by the mere
force of gratitude or by the influence of truth, but by something
immeasurably more powerful, and which touches the deepest foundations of
the divine government—viz. by the righteous restoration of the Spirit of
life in Christ Jesus (Rom. viii. 2). There cannot be the application of
redemption in the way of pardon and acceptance without the accompanying
Spirit of holiness.

Here we must advert to THE PART WHICH CHRIST ACTS IN GIVING THE SPIRIT.
In all Protestant theology, Lutheran and

204

Eeformed, there is a general consent that Christ is the acting
life-communicating head by His Spirit. It is not Christ without the
Spirit, nor the Spirit without Christ. His mediatorial function was not
limited to His earthly life. Nor is it something outward, which every
man is left to appropriate to himself. The whole application of
redemption is not to be regarded merely as man dealing with God, but
rather as the action of the God-man, in His capacity as His people's
representative dealing with the Father, and the Father dealing with the
Son, according to the counsel of peace between them both, with a view to
man's acceptance. And the participation of saving blessings is through
the power of the Spirit. The exalted Saviour has this in view in the
entire exercise of His priestly functions towards God, as well as of His
kingly office towards men. It is not man's will, which is weak and
changeful, but the effectual will of the God-man, which is to be
regarded as the turning-point or hinge. And though He employs His Holy
Spirit according to the economic order in the Godhead, it is by His
direct act as Head that He attaches to Himself His members, and calls
them into fellowship or joint participation with Himself. They are
apprehended by Christ Jesus (Phil. iii. 12).

The FAITH by which the application of His merits is instrumentally
conveyed is itself the gift of Christ, exalted as a Prince and Saviour,
to give the blessings of His purchase, to incorporate the living members
into vital union with Him self, and to work effectually in His people by
the efficacy of His Spirit through the word and in the whole ministerial
commission.

We wish, for the sake of non-theological readers, to refer to this
point—viz. the reproduction of Christ's spiritual life in His people. As
Adam's life is reproduced in the entire human family with all its
alienation from the life of God, and with the organic ruin of their
whole nature, so the new life of the God-man flows over to all His
people. The

natural birth connects us with the first man, and renews his life. The
new birth connects us with the second man, who, by the Holy Spirit,
gathers His people under Him by a self-communicating act. I am the more
desirous to give a due place to this great truth, because it lias been
less developed within the last century than in the previous periods. The
last Adam is a quickening Spirit (1 Cor. xv. 45). That life is in the
Son, who, by the Spirit, apprehends the whole man in all his faculties ;
and the renewing process will be com pleted even on his body at the
resurrection - day. Every believer, though not directly conscious of
connection with the first man, is, or ought to be, permanently conscious
of his union to the second Adam, who is our life.

The Spirit's work was specially intended to form a MYSTIC UNION with
Christ for the application of redemption, and for the INHABITATION of
the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus (Rom. viii. 2). I need not refer in
detail to the several figures or similitudes under which that union is
exhibited in Scripture as a potential reality (2 Cor. xi. 2 ; Eph. iv.
16 ; John xv. 1—6 ; Eph. ii. 20). These various figures taken from
marriage, from the union of the human body with the Head, from the vine
and branches, from the temple and the corner-stone, are intended to set
forth a real and intimate connection, and to show that the inmost soul
of the redeemed is reserved for Christ's inhabitation by the Spirit, who
thus becomes the life of their life, the soul of their soul, in a sense
to which any other known union makes no approximation. The Spirit is the
bond of union on Christ's side, and faith, produced by the Spirit of
faith, is the bond on our side; and when that union is effected, the
soul, like the fruitful branch of the vine, brings forth abundant fruit.

As to the union, in reference to which it is said by the apostle : " He
that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit" (1 Cor. vi. 17), the results
that immediately flow from it are so extensive and so powerful, for the
supply of the covenant

blessings, that Christ's Spirit becomes theirs, His holiness their
holiness, His joy their joy. Such is the Spirit's efficacy, that there
is not one thought, feeling, or emotion pervading the human bosom of the
man Christ Jesus amid the glories of the upper sanctuary, but may be
said to be renewed and reproduced in the experience of His people,
perfectly in the bliss above, incipiently in their present
dwelling-place below. So real is the union through the Spirit, and so
deep the sympathy reciprocally exercised between the ever-living Head in
heaven and the spiritual body which He has united to Himself, that, on
the one hand, every want, necessity, and sorrow under which His people
groan vibrates to Him like the touching of a chord, of which He is
instantly aware ; while, on the other hand, an injury offered to His
cause awakens in them such a sense of oneness and of conscious
identification with His interests and honour as constrains them to say :
" Rivers of water run dow r n my eyes, because they keep not Thy law "
(Ps. cxix. 136). By the Spirit our whole person is united to His whole
Person. And the bond of union depends not, as Eomanists and Eitualists
allege, on bodily contact or local nearness, but on faith, by means of
which we are one with Him ; for Christ does not come down corporeally
from heaven for the accomplishment of any of the objects con templated
by that union in this our earthly pilgrimage.

Whether the elect of God were already united to Christ before the actual
exercise of faith, was a point keenly debated in England two centuries
ago between the followers of Crisp, who affirmed it, and their
opponents, led by Dr. D. Williams, who denied it. As the exaggerated
terms in which the former spoke of eternal justification caused
suspicion and alarm, Witsius, the celebrated Dutch divine, prepared his
admirable irenicum to bring the parties together. 1 The solution which
he gave of the controverted point was con-

1 Vid. Witsius, Animadversiones Irenicce ad Controversial quasdam
Anrjli-canaK, Leyden 1700.

tained in the distinction that the saints were in Christ by a federal
and legal union before the foundation of the world, but that the actual
union—called the mystical or vital union —takes place only WHEN THE HOLY
SPIRIT UNITES THEM to the Son of God. From that moment, they who are
united to the Lord Jesus by one Spirit obtain a true and actual parti
cipation in all that He procured by His obedience unto death. If Christ
satisfied divine justice, they who are united to Him by faith have also
satisfied it. When Christ overcame, they overcame; when Christ received
perfect acceptance as the Surety, they received the same acceptance in
and with Him. And, on the other hand, as Christ obtained a
resurrection-life, a life of holiness and joy at God's right hand for
ever, they, too, who are found in Him, have an incipient life of the
same nature, a life hid with Christ in God (Col. iii. 3).

This brings us to the great truth, frequently affirmed and repeated in
Scripture— THE INHABITATION OF THE SPIRIT in all true believers. The
passages are very numerous which teach this great doctrine. Thus Christ,
in promising the Comforter, who should abide with His disciples for
ever, added, by way of contrasting the world and them : " I will pray
the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter, that He may abide
with you for ever—the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive,
because it seeth Him not, neither knoweth Him: but ye know Him ; for He
dwellctJi with you and shall be in you " (John xiv. 16). The Apostle
Paul, in writing to Timothy, says : " That good thing which was
committed to thee keep by the Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us" (2 Tim.
i. 14). I shall notice, further, the passages where the Christian is
called the temple of the Holy Ghost: " Know ye not that ye are the
temple of God, and that Ike Spirit of God dwelleth in you" (1 Cor. iii.
16). " Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which
is in you, which ye have of God" (1 Cor. vi. 19). We may compare other
similar passages (2 Cor. vi. 16 ; Eph. ii. 22). In all

these passages the Holy Spirit who dwells in Christ, and who is given to
inhabit His people, is said to occupy the Christian's heart as His
temple, not by a mere inactive pre sence, but as animating and pervading
all the faculties and powers of the human mind.

The regenerate man, accordingly, is said to HAVE THE SPIRIT OF CHRIST.
The expression is used by the apostle in the Epistle to the Komans in
two connected clauses in such a way as implies an inhabitation on the
part of the Holy Spirit, and a consequent possession on our side as a
graciously imparted privilege: " But ye are not in the flesh, but in the
Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now, if any man
HAVE NOT THE SPIRIT of Christ, he is none of His " (Rom. viii. 9). To
HAVE THE SPIRIT, then, is inseparably connected with the inhabitation of
the Spirit. We are thus said to " have " the Spirit as the consequence
of His effectual inhabitation, and by a renewing and transforming
principle of life, which constantly operates in the most active manner.
And we are conscious of having so great a guest, because He condescends
to occupy the soul in all its faculties.

It may be proper at this stage to obviate a common misinter pretation,
which tends to evacuate the phrases in the passages to which we have
referred of their full significance. From a speculative reluctance to
accept the idea of the Spirit's per sonal inhabitation, sometimes in one
interest and at other times in another, many interpreters, scholastic as
well as Protestant, expounded the allusions to the indwelling of the
Spirit as referring only to the gifts which He confers.

That is an arbitrary exposition on the part of the inter preter for
which no good ground can be assigned. When the allusion is to gifts
conferred,—except in the case of temporary disciples like Judas,—we must
rather say that the personal Holy Spirit was given along with the gifts
which were bestowed. He did not produce them as an absent regulator of
their distribution, but as a present inhabitant. Nay, we may

0

affirm that a person works only where he is; and it was only as
inhabiting the hearts of believers that He imparted either the
sanctifying gifts or the ministerial gifts.

As this inhabitation is associated with the active exercise of divine
power, it may be further noticed that it underlies all the Christian's
holiness and growth, all his conformity to the divine image and final
perseverance. It is the peculiar feature of every system that takes this
truth in earnest, to bring out the essential difference between grace
and nature, to vindicate the spiritual life as a new creation, to assert
its actual reality, its peculiar organs, its habitual graces
implanted,—with the several actings, experiences, wants, and appetences
which belong to it as a distinct existence, but never separated from the
living Head. To the neglect of this inhabitation of the Spirit must be
ascribed much of the naturalism of the modern theology, which ascribes
the graces of the Spirit only to the ordinary exercises of the mind as
it unfolds itself in joy or sorrow, in faith or love, on a spiritual
object; and they lose sight of the fact that the indwelling Spirit,
filling and animating the renewed mental faculties, calls these graces
into action over the ruins of the opposite corruption. On the contrary,
the schools of theology which do justice to the great fact of the
Spirit's inhabitation, such as the true followers of Augustin and the
Puritans, were happily exempt from that humanistic theology. They
contended not only for Christ's abid ing presence in every spiritual act
(John xv. 5), but for the real implantation of the graces of the Spirit
as well as for the impos sibility of putting them in motion without His
heavenly help.

The most eminent Lutheran divines, in the brightest period of their
theology,—Luther, Chemnitzius, and the like, —were wont to teach that
the inhabitation of the Spirit consisted in two things: IN THE SPIRIT'S
PRESENCE AND OPERATION, or, in a single phrase, in gracious presence.
They were accustomed also to distinguish the modes of the divine
presence in this fourfold way: first, a universal presence over

all the wide realms of creation for the conservation of all things;
secondly, a special sanctifying presence, whereby the Spirit abides in
true Christians, and inhabits them continually through life and in
death, till they fully enjoy the beatific vision; thirdly, the personal
union of the Son of God, whereby He assumed humanity with all that the
assumption carried with it, and replenished that humanity with His
indwelling presence; fourthly, the presence of the Spirit in glorified
saints, whereby He not only fills the heart with all the communications
of His grace, but leads them to behold God's face in righteousness, and
to be satisfied when they awake with His likeness.

The Spirit's work, as the great inhabitant of the regenerate heart,
appears in continually sanctifying all the mental powers; and a marked
line of distinction must be drawn between THE PREVENIENT GRACE OF THE
SPIRIT and His CO-OPERATING GRACE. The former belongs to effectual
calling, regeneration, conversion, and faith, in which the man with all
his powers is the object in whom the Spirit operates by the word; the
latter belongs to His progressive sanctification, in which the Spirit
calls into exercise the new powers of the renewed mind, and where there
are no immediate actings of the Spirit superseding that co-operation:
for who can see without an eye, or hear without an ear ? The Holy Spirit
does not move the hearts of regenerate men by mere power, but on another
principle. He moves them by THOSE SPIRITUAL POWERS or graces with which
they are now provided. The Spirit which is in Christ without measure, is
in them by measure as a Spirit of life, not moving the mind as a stone,
or as a wheel, by mere power, but according to the new nature which has
been created and formed in it. To lose sight of this is to ignore the
fact that Christ is the source of the Spirit of life, and that the
Christian has to add to his faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and
all the various excellences which are perfect in Christ Jesus (2 Pet. i.
5). Hence, they who are renewed

after their Lord's image have, according to their measure, a certain
spiritual power, a certain law of their mind, the law of the Spirit of
life in Christ Jesus, which enables them to overcome and triumph in
their Lord (Rom. viii. 2).

The practical neglect of this distinction may sometimes be traced in
Church history and on whole generations of men. The Lutherans, for
example, though they spoke much and admirably of grace and liberty, were
too easily satisfied that the good tree, by the inevitable law of its
existence, would bring forth its fruit. They neglected the due
cultivation of the graces of the Spirit in the new creature. On the
contrary, the Puritans primed and cultivated the good tree with
unwearied diligence, and made every Christian grace, after scriptural
example, the subject of wholesome exhortation.

I have been led, by various considerations, to attempt a very brief
discussion, in connection with the inhabitation of the Spirit, of the
whole subject of CHRISTIAN ETHICS. It is never safe to leave this
department a blank in theological study, or to hand it over, as is
commonly done, to the cold region of moral philosophy, as if it were
unworthy of special cultivation. The Church is never safe without an
indepen dent study of Christian ethics based on union to Christ, and
deduced from the renewing grace and inhabitation of the Spirit. The
position I lay down is, that Christian ethics, while occupying a
well-understood relation to philosophic morals, are vitally connected
with the inhabitation and renova tion of the Holy Spirit, and that they
have their own peculiar principle, and produce their own independent
results.

I said Christian ethics have a well-understood relation to philosophic
morals. When it is asked, What is that relation ? we answer, one point
may be safely postulated. They cannot contradict each other in their
ultimate decisions. If they could be supposed to contradict each other,
this would involve the startling result that there are two moralities,
one of nature, and another from the Spirit of life; in other words,

that natural religion in its ethical rules held that to be duty which
revealed religion condemned as sinful or unwarrantable. Such a collision
cannot be. It is true they start from totally different principles, and
move in totally different spheres. But in their ultimate results they
can involve no mutual contradiction.

But it may be asked, Is not one of them superfluous ? May we not take
from some of the systems the whole frame work and nomenclature, and
content ourselves with the simple task of replenishing these with a new
spirit or higher life ? Letting the mould remain, may we not pour into
it a new life ? In some such way those must have argued who adopted with
satisfaction the maxim that philosophy is the handmaid of theology,
forgetting that this is the certain way for her becoming mistress. We
may take an illustration from Aquinas. Aware that there is a point of
contact between the Christian ethics and the systems of antiquity, and
unwilling to regard as fruitless the imposing outline which Aristotle
bequeathed, he would superinduce the Christian on the classical, or put
the new wine into the old bottles. He would take the four cardinal
virtues as comprehending all that is purely human, and only supplement
them by the so-called theological virtues, faith, hope, and love, along
with the seven graces of the Spirit. Had he put the two systems —the
philosophical and the Christian—in juxtaposition as shadow and reality,
as law and grace, as nature's deep sigh after an unrealized ideal, and
the realization which the Holy Spirit confers, it might have been an
interesting as well as useful outline. But, as it was, the result was to
the injury of both. Similar illustrations may be drawn from any period
of the Protestant Church, where we find Christian ethics poured into the
mould supplied by the systems of benevolence or of the moral sense.

Are they never to run into one, even in the last problem awaiting the
earth, when reason and revelation shall sweetly

coalesce ? I answer, philosophic morals belong to us as reasonable
beings: Christian ethics belong to us as redeemed men. Melanchthon, who
may be named along with Butler as one of the greatest ethical writers of
the Protestant Church, happily said : " Moral philosophy is that part of
the divine law which treats of external actions." If we accept this
definition, which may be frankly done, philosophic morals differ from
Christian ethics as law from grace, demand from obedience, shadow from
substance. We cannot speak of two moralities. Christianity is not,
according to the Unitarian interpretation of the Sermon on the Mount, a
new and stricter law. It has not come to usher in a different ethics,
but to make the preceptive " thoti shalt" an attained reality by
renewing man's nature, and shedding on him a transforming power, which
shall ennoble and elevate all his faculties and all his relations.

Christian ethics have their own peculiar source, and produce their own
independent results. The entire subject must be placed in immediate
connection with the Spirit of Christ. It is this connection with the
Spirit which ensures to Christian morals their proper independence, and
their cul tivation as a department of theology. When we reach this point
of view, it is no more with abstract ethical laws that we have to deal,
nor a mere ideal that we have to contemplate. A realized ideal of ethics
stands before us in the human life of Christ—into which we are engrafted
by the Holy Spirit in the nearest conceivable way.

From this view of Christian ethics we can look down on the faulty and
ineffectual systems that have been presented to the minds of men. It has
been customary, in some quarters, to consider Christian ethics as
produced by the mere force of motives operating on those who are the
subjects of redemp tion. Nor is that influence to be repudiated ; for it
is a half truth. It has been common amonc: others to restrict the

o

matter to a catalogue of rules, or to a doctrine of duties. Nor

is that to be forgotten or despised. But Christian ethics occupy a much
more close connection with the Spirit as uniting us to Christ. We come
to a point, whenever we touch the resurrection-life, where precept and
fulfilment may be viewed as one. If the subject presupposed in all the
exercises and precepts comprehended in Christian ethics is the risen
Christian,—if nothing is enjoined but what may be developed from his
spiritual life, and it is thus that the apostolic Epistles always put
the matter,—then it is not mere self-acting motives, not a mere doctrine
of duties, but some thing more intimately connected with the divine
Eedeemer, that is the principle of Christian ethics. That principle is
the risen life through the Spirit of life.

To place the relation of Christian ethics to the personal Christ in its
true light, I shall notice the modifications which the entire subject
undergoes, according to the conception which men entertain of Christ's
Person. A brief survey of this point will show in what close connection
they stand to His Person. Greatly should we err were we to suppose that
any view of Christ's Person would equally avail for the production of
Christian ethics. It is the more important to notice this point, because
it has often been said that it is well-nigh indifferent for this
department whether the mind is attached to evangelical sentiments or the
reverse. A cursory glance will immediately show the modifications of the
whole subject according to the opinions entertained of Christ's Person.

On the UNITARIAN VIEW of Christ's Person, the inquirer comes at once to
the conclusion that we have nothing in Christian ethics beyond what
reason can give — a code of rules, a book of duties. It has been found
that, among the Unitarians, there is an ethical system irrespective of
Christ's Person, and that there is nothing to prevent men from hoping to
surpass Him in the use of means and aids furnished by the course of
centuries.

On the PELAGIAN THEORY, which has no renewing work of the Holy Spirit,
the effect on ethics is disastrous. Ethical laxity at once ensues. They
who dispense with the Spirit's aid to restore man to a position higher
than his present imperfection, and who include in their view of grace
nothing more than exhortations and moral suasion to faculties neither
hurt by the fall nor incapable of good, have no high theory above their
practice. And when the distinction between theory and practice is
merged, the consequence is a lax and defective system of ethics.

On the EOMISII THEORY, which transmutes the gospel into a new law, the
system of ethics never escapes from legal bondage, and is never ushered
into liberty; for it discourages all assurance of salvation. So long as
men are exhorted to merit salvation, pride—the inmost sin of the human
heart— never can be destroyed. While attention is limited to single
sins, to the neglect of the sinful nature, men have no humbling
discovery of sin; and thus their whole ethical system oscillates between
bondage and spiritual pride.

The Biblical principle of justification by faith alone affects, to its
utmost limits, the whole dominion of Christian ethics. One broad
position characterizes scriptural Protestantism. Ethical action is not
pursued to merit salvation, but because the man is saved by grace; or,
to adopt the Biblical represen tation, it is the good tree that yields
the good fruits; while the fruits cannot prevail to change the tree. The
notion that ethical action goes before acceptance, and with a view to
secure it, vitiates the entire character of the action. Christian
ethics, on the contrary, are the fruits, results, and evidences of the
salvation. In this all the Protestant Churches are at one, having the
liberty of grace, and dependence on the Holy Spirit.

I have adduced these illustrations from various systems to show that
Christian ethics lean on the Person of Christ, and are an emanation from
the law of the Spirit of life in Christ

Jesus (Eom. viii. 2). They are the effect or issue of living in
communion with Christ through the power of the Holy Spirit, or they are
the mode of acting to which that communion gives rise. When the
Christian dwells in communion, the practice of the virtues is in
consequence of the Spirit's opera tions, not so much an arduous effort
as the natural expression of his life. It is his nature, his life to
practise them. All those single graces and virtues given with the Spirit
of life in Christ Jesus (Eom. viii. 2) only wait to be called into
action ; and that communion with Him who is the life lends the motive
power in most cases without an effort. The passive and effortless
facility with which the Christian practises many of the virtues is often
strikingly exposed by Luther.

But this does not supersede exhortation iii any case. The possibility of
practising the Christian graces, while presup posed and assumed in the
whole domain of the Christian life as a life in the Spirit, does not
preclude earnest admoni tion (Gal. v. 25). It is taken for granted that
they are possible, nay, easy, and that the living Christian, risen with
his Lord, is in a position to exhibit them; and Scripture, accordingly,
when inculcating the practice of the graces, only touches some secret
spring that has power to evoke them. Whether we look at the Sermon on
the Mount, where various graces are enforced, from the deepest relations
of the kingdom of God, of which Christ is the centre;—or at the grace of
humility, enforced by the consideration that He who was in the form of
God humbled Himself (Phil. ii. 3-7); or at the grace of liberality,
commended by the motive that He who was rich became poor,—we find the
same peculiarity. Christian ethics are never isolated from Christ and
the deep relations of His kingdom.

There are only two other points, in speaking of Christian ethics, called
into action by the Holy Spirit, viz.: that every thing is viewed in
relation to God, and that love is made the principle of ethical unity.

​1. The grand peculiarity of Christian ethics is, that in the entire
range of this department nothing is to be isolated from God. As we know
Him who is Light, and Love, and Spirit,

—as all is from God in the power of the Spirit, and to God under the
influence of the same Spirit, nothing is to be done but in connection
with the divine. In the Person of Jesus we see the divine replenishing
the human. And His followers, in like manner, in proportion as they
drink into the same Spirit with Him, ennoble and glorify the scenes of
earthly life by the divine Spirit derived from Him. "While the sphere of
Christian ethics is so closely connected with the divine,—that is, from
God and to God,—it must be added that every earthly relationship, and
every scene in these relationships, must be made a vessel to contain and
diffuse the heavenly treasure. Hence the lives of the early Christians
shone with an un earthly beauty which attracted all eyes. The moral
glory of their life, their purity and happy love, their self-denial and
benevolence, reflected from the surrounding vice and moral lassitude of
heathenism, shone like a vision from another sphere. By the renewing
Spirit the divine was brought within the circle of the human.

​2. In the Christian ethics LOVE is the principle of unity. The
philosophic morals, however much they might struggle toward general
principles, could not advance to the ethical unity of love ; and no
system, uninfluenced by Christianity, ever dreamt of it. This draws the
line between Christianity and all other ethics in ancient or modern
times. That the unity of ethical life is love, may be proved from the
nature of love, which unites the mind to the object, which is the very
result to which all the operations of the Spirit conspire. The Lord and
His apostles teach that the various virtues and graces of the Spirit are
not so much separate qualities, but diversified forms, modifications,
and applications of the same thing which the Spirit produces as the
principle of ethical unity. Paul, in his exhaustive delineation of the
one

diffusive principle of love, describes the fundamental Christian virtues
as all reducible to love (1 Cor. xiii.). He who has love, accordingly,
has all the virtues. The cardinal virtues, the distribution of which was
well and happily given in the ethics of antiquity, — wisdom, temperance,
fortitude, and justice, — are only love as directive, as
self-controlling, as militant, as attentive to the rights of others; and
as love gradually advances, one of these may be at one time in greater
prominence and another at .another. But they are only diversified forms
of ethical unity—of love.

We have now to notice the growing sanctification produced by the Spirit,
or the increasing conformity to the divine image. That which enables
Christianity to achieve what human speculation fails to accomplish, is
the fact that it is a life derived from the Spirit of life,—not an idea,
truth, or opinion,—and that as such it cannot but grow. In all systems
that are of the earth, we have mere ideas which are as jejune and
impotent as their propounders; whereas the last Adam is A QUICKENING
SPIEIT. Whenever Christ is con sidered as a present fountain of life,
and Christianity as open ing the way for the Spirit of life, it is
essentially distinct from the mere influence of philosophical
speculation. For where a new element of life is introduced into fallen
humanity, and nature is not left to be wrought upon by a mere idea or a
system of thought, but animated from within by the Spirit of Him who
says: " I am the life," humanity is in connection with the great
archetype to whose image we are predestinated to be conformed. This life
is in the Son, who apprehends the whole man in all His faculties; all
His people are included in Him as one man; and though their individual
personality is not destroyed, they are included in the second Adam as
they were in the first. In the figure of the vine, employed to explain
this mystery, we are taught that as the vine diffuses life through
numberless branches distinct from one another but not separate from the
stem, so none of His

people can for a moment be independent or isolated from the Spirit of
life. On the contrary, they are conscious of a union to Him who is our
life, and who awakens every spiritual desire in His people to such a
degree that He says : " Without me ye can do nothing."

Xor does the Spirit's subjective operations in any measure destroy man's
freedom, though many theological systems urge the plea of freedom to
exclude the Spirit of God from the heart, lint if the taint of the fall
has not destroyed the essence of the soul, though infecting all its
powers, it is capable of separation without prejudice to its freedom. No
more does this put man's freedom in jeopardy, than the cures which
Christ of old performed on men's bodies—the analogy being precisely
similar. But those objections which are based on the plea of freedom
proceed on an entire oblivion of the disturbing element of the fall.
There is, in reality, no inter ference with man's freedom when the
renewing and sanctify ing work of the Spirit commences and advances,
though it involves all that is implied in a birth to which the man him
self does not at all contribute,—in a new creation which argues almighty
power,—and in a rising from the dead, which involves an energy wholly
from without. The sub jective operations of the Spirit no more interfere
with man's freedom than the objective work of the Son.

Two misleading influences run counter to the active pro secution of
progressive sanctification in the Spirit. Some regard sanctification as
occupying the subordinate place of furnishing but an evidence of our
salvation. They consider that Scripture, in enforcing sanctification of
the Spirit, means little more than to supply an evidence that we are
justified by faith. It is thus made a mere means to an end, whereas it
is everywhere inculcated in Scripture as the express com mand of God (1
Pet. i. 1C; 1 Thess. iv. 3). Another tendency, in a different quarter,
is to regard sanctification in the Spirit as something necessarily
developed of its own

accord, without any exercise of the will. But Scripture allows no
quarter for Quietism in any of its forms.

While the actual possession of the Spirit of life is always presupposed,
and the Christian in the pursuit of sanctification is always reminded to
reckon himself as dead indeed to sin, and alive unto God through Jesus
Christ our Lord (Eom. vi. 11),—in other words, as distinctly
appreciating the specially meritorious ground of acceptance with the
Moral Governor as well as the Person of the risen Christ, the source of
all spiritual life and influence, — the Scriptures do not refrain from
adducing motives. They touch many motives. Thus they adduce all the
motives drawn from the threefold department of liberty, love, and
spirituality (Gal. v. 13-26), from the fear of God (Phil. ii. 12), and
from reward (Matt. x. 42).

The obvious distinction between philosophic morals and Christian
sanctification is, that the former commonly endeavour to produce their
results by a single dominating principle, whereas the latter wields many
various motives. We have only to recall any of the systems of antiquity
or of modern times to perceive this marked distinction. The enumeration
of the distinctive principle which the several systems avowed will
suffice to show this. The principle of Plato—conformity to the divine
image by idea—was a sort of unconscious antici pation of what was to
come, but which there were no powers to effect in the classical world,
apart from that life in the Spirit which was to revolutionize the human
heart from within over all its bounds. That system, which may be called
nature's dumb unuttered sigh for something higher, which the grace of
the Holy Spirit alone could usher in, found in Christianity a
realization—a spiritual and ethical conformity to the divine image in
all the relations of earthly life—which was never dreamed of by its
first propounder. The principle of another philosophic system, that of
happiness as the chief good, mental repose, was a sort of sigh for that
peace of mind and positive enjoyment of God which Christi-

auity alone affords. The principle of another system, that of a life
agreeable to nature, or the Stoical principle, which assumed that man
continued in a nature pure and undis turbed, found its realization in
Him who showed the full harmony of man with His nature, and who renews
us after His image. The principle of another system, the royal mean
between two extremes, which Aristotle applied to civil virtue in the
relations of state-life, are realized in Christian ethics when we rise
to the higher relations of the kingdom of God. The modern systems in
like manner, whether we call up to view those which are known as the
systems of benevolence or of the moral sense, correctly enough make the
moral problem, or the chief end of man, the starting-point of their
philo sophy, and propose a single principle as a lever to move this
human life. But they only evince a partiality in favour of a single
element or influence, if it could be set in motion. And when it is asked
in certain places, What can Christianity do more ?—the answer is, it is
the realization of all that these systems, as the deep sigh of nature,
longed to realize, but failed to call into play. Christianity was the
counterpart of that which nature sighed for, but could not produce. The
truth anticipated in a mere vague expectation here found its truth,
completeness, and reality. But what the gospel furnishes is not ONE
principle, but many. The new life of the Spirit, indeed, is one, and a
principle unknown to philosophic morals. But the motives which are
touched and evoked are manifold and numerous.

Closely connected with this line of thought, the whole subject of the
Redeemer's character, as the perfect exhibition of a divine ideal, comes
under our consideration. And we are changed into the same image as by
the Spirit of the Lord when we behold it (2 Cor. iii. 18). The character
of Christ as the loftiest ideal, the realized standard of human
excellence, and the only exhibition of that image of God in which man
\\vas made, and to which he is predestinated to be conformed,

is meant to be in the constant view of the Church as sketched by the pen
of inspiration. All that can be done is to touch those springs which
recall the reality, and which is to be surveyed and pondered with the
earnest prayer that the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge
of the Lord Jesus may open the eyes of our understanding (Eph. i. 17).
Owen, in his great work on the Person of Christ, well remarks : " Some
men speak much of the imitation of Christ, and following of His example;
and it were well if we could see more of it really in effect. But no man
shall ever become like unto Him by bare imitation of His actions,
without that view or intuition of His glory, which alone is accompanied
with a transforming power to change them into the same image."

. The character of Christ, thus seen through the word and by the
illumination of the Spirit, impresses every mind that gazes on it with a
sense of full-orbed completeness and per fection. But it is of a kind so
new and unprecedented, that minds devoid of the Spirit are insensible to
the glory of it. Let me here bring out more particularly one or two of
the distinguishing features of Christ's moral perfection.

The foundation of all lay in His humility. He laboured not to\* rise
aloft; He was the meek and lowly One. His public was not what men
thought, or mere public opinion, but the eye of an omnipresent Father,
before whom all human distinctions are of no account. This humility,
which has been made the true foundation of all Christian ethics, found
vent in the Lord's history in a renunciation of His own will, in a
retreat from worldly honour, and in the words: " I am among you as one
that serveth." As President Edwards has well re marked : " Christ,
though He was the most excellent and honourable, yet was the most
humble; yea, He was the most humble of all creatures."

Christ's moral eminence was there before any of His works were done. The
latter only revealed Him and discovered

what He was. But these manifestations of spiritual excel lence bring
before us One who, in the possession of the full supply of the Spirit,
shows a full completeness and perfect equipoise of all the graces.
Unlike every other human life, where the excellences and defects are
nearly balanced, all graces were found, and all perfect. One grace did
not dis place another, nor overshadow another. There was such a harmony
of all the gifts and graces of the Spirit, that the exercise of one did
not limit or interfere with the full energy of all the rest. He
discharged the various duties of the family, and evinced to the last
hour the most tender love and filial regard.

And the simple principle which regulated that whole mar vellous life was
obedience to His Father's will: " My meat is to do the will of Him that
sent me, and to finish His work" (John iv. 34). It was an unvarying
obedience at every moment to the living Lawgiver pervading all the steps
of life; and without an unconditional subjection to His Father's will,
He never spent a moment. His whole obedi ence was founded in faith and
love.

The superiority of a living example to mere precept is proverbial. And
duly to affect the minds of men, the moral code required to be embodied
in a life which should engage all eyes and win all hearts. What was said
by Plato, that if perfect virtue appeared among men, as a stranger from
another sphere, all men would fall down and worship her, was not
realized in the sense in which he expressed the anticipation,—for
perfect virtue did appear, only to be despised and rejected,—but it is
verified in the case of all whose minds have, by the regenerating grace
of the Spirit, become suscep tible of impressions from that high and
ennobling standard. The human life of the God-man stands before us as a
pure emanation of humility, obedience, and love ; as an imperishable
treasure, and an ideal to be reproduced in us. And, unlike all merely
human histories, that example has the peculiarity

attaching to it, that in proportion as it is beheld and contem plated in
the light of the Holy Spirit opening the eyes of our understanding, it
exercises a sanctifying power beyond all other influences. It forms in
us through faith the very image of God, which we behold in Him (2 Cor.
iv. 6). This is a creative example, infinitely meritorious as a
procuring cause, and divinely efficacious in producing transforming
results on the believing and adoring mind. It is an ideal which repro
duces itself in the experience of the enlightened saint. His example
becomes, in the Spirit's hand, when duly used, a plastic power, whereby
we are changed into the same image. It is not a cold, distant example to
which we stand in no living relation, and frowning upon us from an
unapproachable elevation: it is the achievement of a forerunner whom we
follow, the attainment of the first-born among many brethren to whom we
are predestinated to be conformed. It embraces all life ; it is an
example in solitude and society, in joy and sorrow, in poverty and the
loss of friends, in suffering and death. And there it is to shine on our
path, to elevate and transform us to what He was.

The spiritual perception of divine things is invariably accompanied with
a sanctifying influence; and knowledge is no further genuine or
spiritual than as it leads to this result. When it is a mere natural and
intellectual perception of divine things, the mind is only elated (1
Cor. viii. 2), not imbued with the humility which is the effect of all
true spiritual knowledge. When it is a perception which takes its rise
from the Holy Spirit, and is kindled by the contempla tion of the divine
perfections, excellence, and glory, the taste is so changed that it is
separated from the pleasures of sin. They who have a spiritual
perception of the divine beauty are drawn by a high attraction, and
easily induced to forego, not only the sins, but the pleasures,
emoluments, and distinctions which absorb men's present thoughts. The
knowledge of God, taught by the Spirit, is invariably connected with a
new

p

spiritual relish, or a new sense, which inclines the mind to rest in God
as better than the creature, to regard sin as repulsive, and holiness as
the element in which the mind delights to dwell. The heart is weaned by
the revelation of the surpassing excellence of God, and so drawn by the
cords of a man, by bands of love, that the supreme God is not only
accepted as its portion, but enthroned as its Lord, to whom every power
must be subjected, and who is nearer and dearer than self.

Thus far we have followed the operations of the Spirit of Holiness, and
traced His work of sanctification, which is, on the one hand, a blessing
unconditionally promised in the covenant of grace (Ezek. xxxvi. 27),
and, on the other hand, a commanded duty according to the will of God (1
Thess. iv. 3). When we inquire what attainment is possible, or what pro
gress is actually made, it appears at once how far men are, for the most
part, from attaining the highest degree of sancti fication. Except in
the cases where young disciples, in the warmth of first love, are prone
to exaggerate their own measure of attainment, and the powers with which
they think themselves invested, or to misconceive the strength and
ramifications of the sin which lurks within them, Christians are
commonly ready to acknowledge how far they are from having apprehended
the great end or object for which they have been apprehended by Christ
Jesus. Legal perfection there is not, and none will claim it. The
evangelical attain ment which the Scriptures hold up before the mind,
arid sometimes term perfection, consists only in the fact that they •who
have the perfect righteousness of Christ imputed to them are so largely
occupied by Christ's Spirit, and so powerfully wrought upon by the
Spirit's grace, that they have the first beginnings of a perfect
obedience which will reach its full measure and degree in the celestial
state. At present, it is more in aim and purpose and unfeigned sincerity
than in performance. Even Paul had not attained, however much he

forgot the things which were behind, and reached forth to those things
which were before (Phil. iii. 13).

A peculiar phase of Christian experience has, in recent times, been
presented to men's attention by those who are commonly known as the
advocates of the higher life, or of the life of faith. They are in
principle and sentiment very much allied to the mysticism of Madame
Guion and the mediaeval mystics. Professor Upham, of America, is the
representative of the class. They have given it to be understood, as
their sort of watchword, that the Christian can in this life do the will
of God without inward opposition, without the inner conflict, or at
least without the consciousness of it. They, moreover, connect the
entering into rest with certain subjec tive frames or phases of inward
experience, instead of repre senting rest as connected with the
acceptance of the Person, offices, and work of the one Mediator between
God and man.

As much loose thinking and unsound doctrine are always disseminated when
the Spirit's work within is made to eclipse or overshadow the Redeemer's
finished work without, it may be useful to notice the points at which
such a theory diverges from sound doctrine. These are two: (1) defective
views of Christ's imputed righteousness; and (2) a misapprehension of a
Christian's double being. Instead of extolling the surety-righteousness
of the Lord Jesus, all Perfectionists speak only of what is infused.
They call in an exaggerated, overweening estimate of their own
sanctification, and depreciate the law-magnifying obedience of Christ as
the Lord our righteousness. As to the double being of a Christian,
consisting, as he does, during this mortal life, of flesh and spirit,
they do not make the necessary distinction, and involve themselves in
painful confusion of thought.

That there is an inner conflict in the bosom of every Christian mind, is
put beyond all doubt by the testimony of all the saints in every age.
That there is a carnal mind o-ap/co?) even in the regenerate, is
emphatically

brought out by the Apostle Paul in describing his own expe rience in the
latter part of the seventh chapter of the Epistle to the Romans (vii.
14-25). Though Pelagians, Arminians, and Piomanists oppose that
interpretation, there can be no doubt, as Augustine and all the
Reformers have conclusively proved, that the apostle in that passage
refers to a conflict carried on in his own soul at the time when he
penned the Epistle. And this plainly argues that he laid claim to no
perfection of holiness within. There was an internal conflict between
flesh and spirit—between an old and new nature. And the strange thing
is, that in this conflict the powers and faculties of the Christian seem
to be occupied at one time by the one, and at another time by the other.
The same intel lect, will, and affections come under different
influences, like two conflicting armies occupying the ground, and in
turn driven from the field. To the astonishment of the Christian
himself, the mind and affections engaged in the exercise of holy love by
the power of the Holy Spirit, may all of a sudden be turned away by some
root of sin or strange law of associa tion in the mental economy to the
very opposite; and thus the conflict continues to the end. We may
compare it—though no analogy can exactly portray it—to one in a state of
convalescence, where disease and health are struggling for the mastery,
sometimes the one predominating, sometimes the other, .till the disease
is fully and for ever expelled from the veins.

The apostle draws a distinction, indeed, between his true and proper
self and the sin that dwelt in him. But that was not intended to divest
himself of responsibility, or to escape from repentance and confession.
Rather it was to rise above the dejection of such a constant,
unintermitting conflict. He describes a law of sin warring against the
law of his mind, constraining the cry for help, as a captive cries, and
a divine interposition which sets him free. This is a vivid picture of
conflict, of defeat, and then of the Spirit's help given in answer

to his cry for deliverance. The delineation is given in such a way as
proves that the flesh resists the Spirit. The resistance is felt
whenever we put forth any spiritual activity, like the effort to move a
palsied member or a wounded arm ; for when it is passive there is no
resistance. In like manner, any holy activity is met by opposition from
the opposite conception.

This exposition will suffice to prove that while the Spirit of holiness
is ever active, the measure of attainment is always imperfect and
defective. While the Christian presses toward the mark, he is never
perfect; nor does he ever reach a stage when there is no more conflict,
and no performance of God's will without the consciousness of inward
opposition.

LECTURE VI.

THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE CHURCH.

I SHALL direct attention in this lecture to the Spirit's work in the
Church, first in founding it, and then in making its ordinances
available to their true design.

The Church of Christ, in the days of His flesh, did not, properly
speaking, exist, though His word had found entrance into individual
souls. It was at Pentecost that the Lord, by the power of His Spirit,
welded into a Church the souls on whom the word had exercised a saving
efficacy. The Holy Spirit, at the commencement of what is called His "
mission," collected the disciples into a living unity; and this great
work of the Spirit is called the Church, the kingdom of God, the body of
Christ, the temple of the Spirit, the habitation of God in the Spirit
(Eph. ii. 22), a conquest from the kingdom of darkness and death. It
rises, as a fabric, in all the majesty of its proportions, on the ruins
of that empire of rebellion and sin which previously occupied the world.
It forms a true city of refuge to all who desire to escape from the
tyranny of the destroyer.

In the apostolic age, the idea of THE KINGDOM OF GOD, to which ample
allusion is made in the prophets and in our Lord's parables, is less
presented to our notice than the idea of THE CHURCH. Let me advert to
the relation which Christ occupies to the Church as King and Head, and
to the place which the Spirit fills in this living organism.

Here the mediatorial acts of Christ are not to be omitted from our
consideration. Thus, in two sayings which may

THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IX THE CHURCH. 231

easily be harmonized, the Lord said: " It is expedient for you that I go
away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you" (John
xvi. 17); and again: "I will not leave you comfortless [better: orphans]
; I will come to you " (John xiv. 18). The two things—the departure and
coming—are there conjoined without disharmony or contra diction. The
Lord departs, and yet comes ; and the solution of that variety of
statement is by no means difficult.

The influences of the Spirit on the Church are considered by many as
emanating rather from the Spirit's proper motion than communicated by
Christ, whose deputy He is, according to their economical relations. To
obviate this one-sided representation, we have only to recall the
Baptist's statement, taken up and repeated by the Lord Himself: "He
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire " (Matt. iii. 11;
Acts i. 5). This momentous truth, that Christ baptizes with the Holy
Ghost,—in other words, has authority to dis pense the Spirit,—is not to
be obscured for the sake of another truth which may, if unduly urged, be
made the occasion of introducing the notion of isolated action in the
Godhead, than which it is hardly possible to imagine any view more
replete with disastrous consequences. All the Persons act indivisibly in
every divine act, according to their order in the Trinity.

An analogy may be traced between the baptism of Christ, by which He was
inaugurated into office, and the effusion of the Spirit on the day of
Pentecost, after He received the plenary unction of the Spirit (Acts ii.
33). In a word, these two events indicated two grades of unction, or two
stages in the communication of the Spirit to Him. The former, accom
panied with the descent of the Spirit, was meant to equip the Redeemer
for entering on His office. The latter was intended to found the
Christian Church and supply it with the living organs and various gifts,
by which it efficiently exercises the spiritual life for the advancement
of Christ's cause. The

232 THE DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

Lord Jesus personally abstained from any step of His ministry till the
Spirit descended upon Him, and John's baptism introduced Him to His
work. The apostles, in like manner, tarried in Jerusalem, as the Lord
directed them, till they were endued with power from on high. As a
historic fact, the Christian Church came into existence only when the
Spirit, by a miraculous effusion, was shed on the assembled multitude of
disciples, and constituted them the Church of the Lord. The Twelve were
honoured with a peculiar calling, for the execution of which the Spirit
furnished them with capacities and endowments. The Church came into
being with the ofh'ce-bearers, and was never without the offices and
spiritual gifts.

With the rise of the Christian Church a new epoch dawned; new
transforming influences entered into history. They who were called out
of the mass of mankind by the sanctification of the Spirit (1 Pet. i. 2)
were constituted THE CHURCH, a society of believers with a common
interest in Christ's re demption and a common hope of glory. As a
corporate society, they have communion with the Lord Jesus Christ in His
saving blessings, and with all believers in the living Head. The Church,
animated by His Holy Spirit, came into existence in virtue of the
election of the Father, the re demption of the Son, and the regenerating
grace of the Holy Spirit. How closely the Spirit is connected with that
living organism—its functions, office-bearers, sacraments, gifts, and
ordinances—will appear when we call to mind that He creates it by His
life-giving agency, sustains and supports it in its functions, infuses
life, unction, and ability for the exercises by which the members edify
and comfort one another, and without whom it could neither exist nor
cohere. By the Holy Spirit, every true member of the Church is
consciously joined to the Head; and the several members are held
together rather by inward than by outward bonds.

When we examine the description of the Church in

Scripture, we find the emphatic announcement that it is one body, and
that one Spirit inhabits and animates it (Eph. iv. 4). The Church has a
twofold function, neither side of which can be neglected. It is (1) a
HOLY SOCIETY in the world, maintaining a state of separation from the
world, meeting together for the worship of God, and walking according to
His will for mutual edification as well as for God's declarative glory ;
it is (2) A MISSIONARY INSTITUTE, with a view to propagate or extend the
gospel to them that are without. Let us briefly look at both.

I. With regard to the Church as A HOLY SOCIETY meeting for worship and
edification, the Epistles are replete with allusions to this feature.
Thus THE UNITY of the Church is expressly named when it is said : "
There is one body and one Spirit" (Eph. iv. 4). Whether we regard it as
living through a succession of economies or existing con temporaneously
in the world in many lands, it is ONE, a society holding the Head and
knit together by the same Spirit; though, at some parts of its history,
rather believed than capable of being distinctly traced. All true
members of the Church, because joined to the Lord, are one Spirit (1
Cor. vi. 17), however differing in language, country, or condition;
while they who are without the Spirit cannot be regarded as true members
of the Church, because not animated by its vital principle. The Church
is ONE not in consequence of its efforts after union,—nor in virtue of
the mutual harmony which pervades its different parts, for these are but
fruits and pledges of a previous unity in the Lord,—but in virtue of the
one indwelling Spirit.

From the essential relation in which it stands to Christ, the Church,
moreover, is described under figures, which will more appropriately aid
our conceptions of its nature than all other definitions put together.
Besides the striking figure already named, that of one lody and one
Spirit, it is

called the bride of Christ, showing a mutual relation, a perpetual
union, and a preparation for the final perfection (Eev. xix. 7 ; 2 Cor.
xi. 2), a temple, or habitation compacted together,—of which Christ is
the foundation and chief corner stone, and each member is a living stone
(1 Pet. ii. o), the vine and branches,—one vital principle sustaining
the whole (John xv. 1-G).

These illustrations suffice to prove that Christians are a corporate
society, a habitation of God in the Spirit, and that lie truly dwells by
His Spirit, as He dwelt in the temple of Jerusalem, by clear pledges of
His presence. The assemblies of Christians, replenished by His Spirit,
are His temple, where He dwells in a more glorious manner than in Israel
(2 Cor. iii. 7). That this is the import of the allusion is obvious from
the elucidation which the apostle subjoins from the Old Testament
Scriptures (2 Cor. vi. 16-18). For He warns them against such as
preached the wisdom of men instead of the revelation of divine grace ;
and declares the culpable character of their proceedings by allusion to
the inhabitation of the Holy Spirit, who condescends to dwell among His
people and to walk in them, and to make them the sons and daughters of
the Lord Almighty.

The four epithets applied to the Church in the
Nicseno-Constantinopolitan Creed may be accepted without hesitation as
furnishing the marks of the Church, viz. ONE, HOLY, CATHOLIC, and
APOSTOLIC CHURCH. But, without expatiating on these predicates in
detail, let me notice that the Church, as a living organism, enjoys the
inhabitation of the Holy Ghost, and makes itself felt in society in a
great variety of ways. It is invisible, so far as it rests on the
gracious operations of the Spirit. But that distinction between the
visible and invisible Church, proper enough,—nay, necessary in connec
tion with the points involved in the Itomish controversy,— was never
meant to paralyze the hands of those who labour, within due bounds, to
conform the Church to the standard

THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IX THE CHURCH. 235

and ideal presented to us in apostolic Christianity. The Church,
animated by the Spirit, evinces its vitality and influence in every
sphere.

The connection of the individual with the Church rests on the possession
of true faith, or effectual calling by the Holy Spirit. According to the
Protestant distinction, as it has been happily formulated, it is the
believer's relation to Christ that puts him in connection with the
Church ; not his con nection with the Church that puts him into a saving
relation to Christ. And to this universal Church belong all of every age
and country who have been engrafted into Christ by the Spirit, whether
they are of the Church militant or of the Church triumphant. The four
constituents or essential qualities which come to light in connection
with the Church as an organized body, may be briefly noticed before we
pro ceed to describe the Spirit's agency.

​1. The constitution of the Church was the form according to which the
apostles, as the organs of a plenary inspiration, moulded the Christian
society. And the whole discussion on the true organization of the Church
has always turned on the one question, Which form is the most close
resemblance to the apostolic model ? A constitution of some kind has
always been deemed necessary; and apostolic sanction, at least in its
great outlines, has never been denied to it.

​2. The element of worship, another constituent of the Church, is that
exercise of the assembled congregation by which the holy priesthood, in
a befitting way, by the aid of the Spirit, approaches God through the
intercession of the High Priest of our profession, and offers not
external sacri fices, which have all been abolished by the one valid and
accepted sacrifice, but themselves as living sacrifices (Eom. xii. 1).
And their praises, thanksgivings, and prayers,—the fruit of their
lips,—are represented as spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ (1 Pet. ii. 5 ; Heb. xiii. 15).

​3. Confession is another constituent of the Church. The Christian body
replenished with the Holy Ghost, expresses a common testimony, or the
consciousness of holding a sum of knowledge or of truth based upon the
apostles' doctrine (Acts ii. 42). And this is so connected with the
exercise of faith that the two are as inseparable in the Christian
society, as in the case of the individual who believes with the heart
and makes confession with the mouth (Horn. x. 10). Faith assimilates to
itself the objective word of God in such a way that it reproduces that
word in the form of a common confession through the influence of the
Holy Spirit. It is the Spirit of life that enables the Church to find
the adequate expression. On this topic let me add, that only extensive
advances in the doctrine and life of the Church render a new Confession
warrantable. And as the enlarged experience which sheds increased light
on the various truths of revelation not seldom runs parallel with the
rise of new errors, the Church has generally to do two things—present a
negative side to error, and fill the foreground with positive truth.
Theology is made subservient only so far as to furnish the due expres
sion for the truth held by all in common.

​4. Discipline, a fourth constituent of the Church, is an important
addition or appendix to the other three, for the removal of scandals and
for the correction of those who incur censure. The Reformed Church
warrantably made this a constituent of the Church as well as the others
already named. Writers in foreign Churches, like Guericke and others, do
not scruple to condemn the Churches of the Reformed as receding from the
sound idea of a Church, and in so far approaching to that of Borne, as
they include the elements of discipline and constitution as well as word
and sacrament among the conditions or constituents of the Church. These
views are a forgetfulness of the fact that the laws of Christ are to be
administered under the solemn charge of responsibility to Him ; and His
approving salutation at last

will be based only on faithfulness to Him. To neglect this constituent
element, as has been proved by all history, is only to forfeit purity
and spiritual influence. Of this the Greek Church is a striking
monument. Her downfall to the lowest degradation is traced by
Sozomen—one of her own historians —to the dilapidation of her
discipline.

How are we to explain Christ's presence in the Church along with the
Spirit's agency ? Many of the theories on the mode of Christ's
presence—in Patristic, Eomish, Lutheran, and Anglican theology—would
never have been agitated, or would even now be sopited, if these
relations had been duly considered and understood by the
controversialists on both sides.

Christ's activity as Lord and Head of the Church seems at first sight to
militate against the action of the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and
conversely. That these important aspects of truth may not have the
appearance of coming into collision, let me refer to their relation. The
regulation of the Church's life—sometimes spoken of as if it were
retained in Christ's own hand, sometimes described as if it were
committed to the Holy Spirit—must be regarded as two announcements of
the same great truth, without any difference, two sides of one and the
same thing. The Lord Jesus, the Mediator, does all by the Holy Spirit in
fostering, quickening, guiding the Church; and so intimately are these
two things conjoined, — the Melchizedek-priesthood on the one hand, and
the dispensa tion of the Spirit on the other,—that they must constantly
be seen together (Acts ii. 33). The exalted Christ continuously acts for
the Church's good by His Spirit through the word.

Where these two doctrines are sundered in the theological conceptions of
individuals or bodies of men, it is to the pre judice of right views of
Christ's Person, and to the deteriora tion of sound views of the
sacraments. Thus the Lutheran Church, to maintain her peculiar views of
the Lord's Supper, is compelled to lay emphasis on the alleged ubiquity
of

Christ's humanity. But by so doing they evacuate the Spirit's work in
that proportion. The Lord's own teaching is that He acts by the Spirit
on His Church, and that He is present not by the ubiquity of His human
nature, but \~by His omni present Spirit, who is at once in Him and in
us, as a perpetual bond or link. The presence of the Holy Spirit in the
Church —that is, of Christ by the Spirit whom He obtained by His
obedience, and confers from His throne — constitutes the Church's glory.

To put Christ's own OMNIPRESENCE in its proper light, it is necessary to
remark that it is one of the perfections of His immutable divine
nature—a fact belonging to Him as a divine Person, and that cannot be
more or less. It is not a matter of promise, but a fact, an inalienable
fact. But His GRACIOUS PRESENCE, as the Incarnate One, is matter of
promise, and may or may not be according to His relations with His
people; and when Christ promised to be with His Church subsequently to
the ascension, He intimated not so much His divine omnipresence as a
presence by the Spirit— as must be evident to every mind that duly
considers the above-mentioned statement. His presence with His people
involved gracious privilege, which might be imparted or with held
according to His good pleasure or the emergencies of His Church. And He
gave His disciples to understand in His last discourses, that, without
the agency of the Holy Spirit, the New Testament Church could neither
come into existence nor be perpetuated in the world. Nor was the promise
of the Spirit's presence limited to public occasions or to external
institutions. Christ is there undoubtedly by His Spirit. But His
presence while felt there by His living disciples, is not bound to more
public occasions, nor to ecclesiastical institutions, as its exclusive
sphere.

According to the mediatorial economy, based on the order of the Trinity,
Christ sends the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, as His deputy. There is no
isolated action among the Persons

THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IX THE CHURCH. 239

of the Godhead, and cannot be, because they all equally par ticipate in
the divine essence, and act according to their order of subsistence in
all divine acts. Where the one is, there the others are. This
fundamental axiom, in which every intelli gent Trinitarian must concur,
enables us to obviate those half-truths which are incautiously admitted
in the Churches.

The action of Christ and of His Spirit, conjoined, comes vividly before
us in all the services and worship of the Church. When the Lord uttered
the memorable words: " Where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them" (Matt, xviii. 20), He intimated
that by the Spirit He would inhabit ordinances, and make His presence
consciously felt. According to the scriptural view of worship, the
company of the disciples, depending on Christ's merits, and conscious
that by one Spirit they are all baptized into one body and made to drink
into one Spirit (1 Cor. xii. 13), has to continue, as in the first days
of the Christian Church, stedfast in the apostles' doctrine and fellow
ship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers (Acts ii. 42).

According to this economy, CHRIST is PRESENT BY His SPIRIT, conducting
the communications of God to man, and the worship of man to God, the
channel of divine supplies to us, and the medium by which the returns of
praise, prayer, service, and obedience are acceptably offered. The Holy
Spirit acts in both respects as the Comforter or Deputy in Christ's
name, filling His mystic body and presenting their spiritual sacrifices
(1 Pet. ii. 5). This view of worship to which the action of the High
Priest and the aid of the Spirit are absolutely essential, is brought
out in a memorable psalm: " I will declare Thy name to my brethren ; in
the midst of the Church will I praise Thee" (Ps. xxii. 22 ; Heb. ii.
12). The Lord Jesus acts from God to us and from us to God, in both
instances by the power of the Holy Spirit.

This view of Church-worship is vitiated in two opposite ways to the
manifest injury of the doctrine of the Spirit—

!MO THE DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

​(1) by a blighting Ritualism, and (2) by an evacuating theory not less
blighting. Ritualism, Romish or Anglican, agrees in making the Church's
action a substitute for the action of Christ and His Spirit. On whatever
ground it is placed, whether it represents the Church's action as a
perpetual con tinuation of Christ's life on earth, and therefore a sort
of perpetual incarnation, which was Mohler's theory, or describes the
Church's action as meritorious and propitiatory, which is the common
theory, it entirely ignores the operation of the Spirit of God, and
binds the results to a mere array of forms. It makes the ever - acting
High Priest a mere inactive spectator, and is irrespective of the
Spirit's grace and of the receiver's faith. The whole transaction is
lodged in other hands. Ritualism conjoins the sacraments and the Spirit
in such a sense that the dispensation of the one is equivalent to the
communication of the other.

An opposite extreme is the false spiritualism which makes the sacraments
but empty signs. Too many in the Reformed Churches, under the spell of
an evacuating system which the Germans call Zwinglianism, have gone far
to denude sacra ments of the Spirit's presence, as if there were no
sacramental union between the sign and the thing signified. That there
is no virtue in the mere emblems, or in the administrator, is as true on
the one side, as it is true on the other side that there is the blessing
of Christ and the working of His Spirit to them that by faith receive
them. Mr. Stowel, for example, in his work on the Spirit, assails a
theory applicable to every Church in Christendom, and one which he owns
was not abandoned by the Puritans of England nor by the Non conformist
clergy, in these terms : " If by means of grace," says he, " no more be
meant than states of mind in which the Spirit gives us grace, and the
connection of such states of mind with the instructions of teachers, and
with offices of devotion believingly attended to, we should be only
fastidious in taking exception to such language; but if it be the old

THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE CHURCH. 241

Church-doctrine of media gratice, the notion that through these means as
channels and instruments the Holy Ghost works invisibly within
men—against that notion, by whatever words conveyed, we must gravely and
conscientiously protest. Neither the Scriptures nor the Christian's
experience permit us to doubt that prayer for what God has promised,
offered with faith in His promise, is followed by the blessing prayed
for; and the history of Christianity abounds with proofs of some
established connection between the preaching of the word and the
salvation of men's souls. But who that ponders the meaning of words can
believe that either prayers or preaching is the means through which the
actual gift of salvation is conveyed ? It can be no disparagement of so
vital an exercise as prayer, to conceive of it as being what it really
is, the address of the devout heart to God, but not the channel of God's
grace to man. Neither can it be any dis paragement of the preaching of
the gospel to regard it as being what it really is, the truth of God
addressed to men, but not the vehicle of the Spirit by which man is
prepared to receive the message with the faith whereby we are saved "
(p. 223).

These are unhappy views, and too widely diffused, repudiat ing the
theory that the Spirit of God imparts the grace of regeneration through
the Church, and the notion of spiritual power belonging to an outward
institution. But the gospel is the ministration of the Spirit, and we
may maintain that the word and sacraments are made the vehicle or
channel of conveying what they announce. These are evacuating prin
ciples unknown to the theology of the Reformation and of the Puritanic
age as well as to Patristic literature. A false spiritualism separating
itself from sacraments and ordinances which God instituted as the
channels through which His Spirit is conferred, would, if carried out to
its legitimate con sequences, lead to a treatment of the sacraments as
if they were a superfluous form. The view which Calvin propounded

as a safe middle ground was: That sacraments do not impart grace (ex
opcre opcrato] by their mere administration, but that they are not mere
barren signs (nuda siyna); that they are channels of blessing to every
believing recipient; the blessing being given by Christ's own hand, and
through the working of the Spirit to them that by faith receive them.

Here it may be proper to show that it is ONE CHURCH OF GOD under a
different guise in the Old Testament and in the New. The same Spirit of
faith filled the heart of believers, whether they lived before or after
the advent of Christ (2 Cor. iv. 13). The Trinitarian relations were the
same; and the divine perfections in the matter of our salvation were
exhibited in the same w r ay. The sacraments, it is true, were changed
more than once to be adapted to different epochs in the history of
redemption. Their efficacy, however, was the same through the power of
the Spirit in every economy to all that by faith received them. On this
point the Churches of the Reformation were for a time at one in
opposition to the Romish doctrine, that the sacraments of the Old
Testament were but types of those of the New Testament; that the former
communicated nothing, and that the latter conveyed blessings in the mere
order of operation. The Reformers maintained without exception, that in
both economies the sacraments were identical in import and efficacy.
"With the Romanists it had long been a dogma that the sacraments of the
Israelitish dispensation were only shadows of those instituted for the
Christian Church. All the Protestant Churches with one consent
maintained the opposite till a different view began to be propounded
among the Lutherans. But down to the time of Chemnitzius we find it held
as an accepted opinion in opposition to the Romanists, that there was no
essential difference in the sacraments of the two economies. That
eminent Lutheran theologian maintained that there was no other grace and
no other faith by which men were saved in the Old Testament than that
grace and

THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIEIT IN THE CHURCH. 243

faith by which men are saved in the New, and no real differ ence between
the spiritual efficacy of the sacraments in the two economies. A general
assent was given in the Lutheran and Reformed Churches to the doctrine
laid down by Augustin, that the only difference between the sacraments
of the two economies was, that those in the Old Testament announced a
Saviour about to come, while those of the New Testament announced a
Saviour already come. In process of time, Lutheran divines began to
modify the common Pro testant doctrine; and step by step, by one
concession after another, they found themselves constrained, by the
necessities of their new position, to drop their confession to the
essential identity, and to the equal spiritual efficacy, of the
sacraments of both economies. They began to assert, with the Romanists,
that the sacraments of the Old Testament were but a type or shadow of
the sacraments of the New Testament. In the same way Anglican Ritualists
are wont to expound their sentiments. The Reformed Churches never
wavered. With Calvin, they have all continued to assert that the
covenant of grace was substantially the same, though economically
different in form. They never conceded that in the Old Testament there
was only type or shadow, and nothing of reality. They maintained that
under the Old Testament believers not less really apprehended Christ's
atoning sacrifice than is done by believers now, though it was exhibited
to them in another way than to us in the New Testament sacraments.

​II. Let me now advert to the Church as A MISSIONARY INSTITUTE, and to
the work which the Holy Spirit conde scends to discharge in connection
with the ingathering of new disciples, with the propagation of the
gospel, and the revival of religion. It may be noticed that there are
three titles,— ministers of Christ, ministers of the gospel, ministers
of the Church,—which are an exhaustive exhibition of the office (Col.
i.), and that there is an exercise of the Spirit's power

through them analogous to that which was exercised on the day of
Pentecost. The union of disciples in prayer and supplication, and in
waiting for the promise of the Father, is also analogous, and never to
be interrupted. The instru ments by whom the Spirit works are also
prepared for service in a similar way, only without the miraculous
accompani ments. They are Christians first, and then called to official
labour.

The rich supply of extraordinary GIFTS bestowed at Pente cost was not
intended to continue when they had served their purpose in founding the
Christian Church. The other gifts of an ordinary character were given
for the permanent advantage of the Church, and are so essential to her
edifica tion, that, without them, she would collapse or disappear. Their
continuance is a constant proof that Christ lives as the dispenser of
the Holy Spirit. Some of them are gifts of office —and of every
conceivable variety—for acting on the mind of others, while the general
body of Christians is supplied with gifts and endowments, wealth and
influence, which the Spirit induces them to wield for the common
benefit. The perma nence of the Church does not depend on offices alone,
as Irving and Lb'he represented the matter, nor on gifts alone, as the
Plymouth Brethren will have it, but on both conjoined.

Every minister truly called to office by the Spirit of God has a gift
which may be described as innate, but brought to light and activity by
the regenerating work of the Holy Spirit. Fundamentally, it is a natural
or concreated endow ment, but called into exercise by the Spirit for the
good of the Church, and fitting the possessors to do a work which no
other can do so well; and the conscious possession of which should have
a twofold effect, should disengage their mind from all tendency to envy
the gifts of others, and to be discontented with their own.

The first disciples were called to wait in the attitude of humble
supplicants for the power with which they were to be

THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE CHURCH. 245

endued by the Holy Spirit coming upon them (Acts i. 8) ; and we have
there an example of what is ever to be re produced. Before this they
evinced ignorance and prejudice, timidity and shrinking from the cross,
ambition and pride. After the descent of the Spirit there was no more
debate who should be the greatest; they forgot self, and rose to an
eleva tion previously unknown. They imbibed new ideas of the
spirituality of Christ's kingdom. The Spirit brought all things back to
their remembrance. The instruments that the Spirit formed felt that they
are rather passive than active in the whole work—tools in another's
hand.

Here we must refer to THE MINISTRY OF THE SPIRIT (2 Cor. iii. 8). With
regard to this remarkable expression, it may denote one of two things.
It may mean—(1) that the Holy Spirit, as the author of the ministry in
its manifold varieties, constitutes the offices, raises up the men, and
endows them with their rich variety of gifts; or (2) it may mean, as I
rather think, that the gospel ministry, whether in the hand of the
apostles—the chief functionaries—or of ordinary office bearers, is
exercised with the accompanying power of the Holy Spirit sent down from
heaven. The expression will thus convey the thought that the Spirit
gives the spiritual and edifying effect along with the gifts and
ordinances which have been appointed in the Church. In speaking of the
union between these ordinances and the Spirit's accompany ing power,
precision is necessary in order to avoid excess of statement on the one
hand, and defect of statement on the other. An examination of the Acts
of the Apostles discovers to us the Spirit's present operation
everywhere along with the preaching of the gospel. And whenever the veil
is lifted up, the reader gets a glimpse into the movements of the
kingdom of God, and into the unseen agency of the Spirit, which is
everywhere declared. And from this we infer His ever present activity in
all centuries and localities alike. The Church has not been left to
herself.

We find united the greatest apparent opposites: weakness and power,
emptiness and sufficiency, limitation and the boundless resources of
omnipotence, the earthen vessel ready to go to pieces at the slightest
pressure and the excellency of power, an unimposing agency with the
mightiest force that stirs humanity; in a word, what Milton calls " the
un-resistihle might of weakness," or what the prophet calls the worm
Jacob thrashing the mountains and beating them small. The ministry is so
connected with the Spirit that the human speaker is but the instrument,
and He the hand that moves them; and nothing remains to man but the
labour.

An inscrutable sovereignty appears in dispensing the divine blessing,
and in founding the Church in any locality (Acts ii. 1, xi. 20). This
appears even in connection with an apostle. It may be proper, at the
outset, to say that success did not lie within his resources or
appliances in such a sense that it could be made the subject of human
calculation; that the increase was of God (1 Cor. i. 6); and that men
cannot dispense blessings at their discretion. While that is one side of
a great truth, it is not to be denied that the preacher must have an
organic aptitude for his office, or be a fit instrument. And, among
other things comprehended in this,—such as personal consecration,
dependence on God's Spirit, incessant prayer, and the like,—it is
commonly the man imbued with the greatest desire for fruit who most
plentifully reaps it.

Here the question may be raised : Has any connection been divinely
established between the Spirit's exercise of saving power and the
proclamation of reconciliation or redemption by the cross? It is a
momentous question, but capable of a distinct answer. We must
distinguish. On the one hand, God never puts the blessings of salvation
out of His own hand into the hand of others, nor diffuses the operations
of His Spirit by any other channel than in the line of His electing
purpose. On the other hand, a connection is established between the
preaching of reconciliation by the cross and the exercise of the
S}nrit's power, to

THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE CHURCH. 247

an extent that cannot be affirmed of any other type of doctrine. In
making this statement, we are neither treading on the region of mystery,
nor treading insecurely—for we have the guidance of the divine word. The
apostle says: " This only would I learn of you, received ye the Spirit
by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith, that is, the
preaching of faith " (aKorj TTicrreeo?); a statement intimating that the
Spirit had been received by the Galatians, not in connection with a
doctrine which laid stress on ritual observances or a more moral code
legally enforced, but in connection with the proclamation of redemption
by the blood of Christ, and received by faith. To human view, indeed, no
obvious link of connection can be perceived between that style of
preaching and the transform ing power of the Holy Spirit. But a divine
connection does exist, as is there explicitly declared. When the apostle
calls the gospel "the power of God" (Kom. i. 16), and the preach ing of
Christ crucified "the power of God" (1 Cor. i. 24), we have a statement
which explicitly affirms that the DIVINE POWER of the Spirit goes
associated with the proclamation of the atonement, but will not be
associated with a style of teaching which substitutes any other theme.

The first and most momentous question is: On what footing does the
preacher take men up in reference to the Judge of all the earth, and
what is the specific which he brings home to them as adequate to meet
their case 1 Where an uncertain sound is given on KUIN, EEDEMPTION, and
EEGENE-RATION, the sinner fails to recognise himself in the mirror held
up to him. There is nothing to bring him into the divine presence, or to
bring home the pointed address, " Thou art the man." Nothing can be
named as more important than the precision with which the line is drawn
between law and gospel, which was the distinctive feature of the Pauline
theology, and the restoration of which was the great achievement of the
Reformation, which, after the long torpor of ages, brought back
preaching to the place it occupied in

apostolic times. Without that distinction, preaching loses its edge. The
law is enforced on the impenitent, and the gospel commended to the
contrite. The Reformation made this distinction familiar to all men as a
household word, and gave it the prominence that belongs to it.

The Church is gathered in any given locality only where Christ crucified
is preached. This held true in the founding of the Church at first, and
holds true in the planting of it in any heathen land. And the same
doctrine which formed it is necessary to sustain it from age to age;
for, as Luther happily expressed it, the article of Justification is the
article of a standing or falling Church. The only security of the Church
is to give no uncertain sound on the great doctrines of Christianity;
the deep-seated ruin of mankind and their vast guilt; the Deity, the
mission, and atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ; the necessity of
regeneration by the Holy Ghost; the need of forgiving grace ; the
assurance of salva tion ; the tenor of the covenant of grace. " I am not
sensible," said Dr. Chalmers, when referring to the actual though
undesigned experiment which he prosecuted for upwards of twelve years in
Kilmany, " that all the vehemence with which I urged the virtues and the
proprieties of social life had the weight of a feather on the moral
habits of my parishioners. And it was not till I got impressed by the
utter alienation of the heart in all its desires and affections from
God; it was not till reconciliation to Him became the distinct and the
prominent object of my ministerial exertions ; it was not till I took
the scriptural way of laying the method of reconciliation before them;
it was not till the free offer of forgiveness through the blood of
Christ was urged upon their acceptance, and the Holy Spirit given,
through the channel of Christ's Mediatorship, to all who ask Him was set
before them as the unceasing object of their dependence and their
prayers; it was not, in one word, till the contemplations of my people
were turned to these great and essential elements

THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE CHURCH. 249

in the business of a soul providing for its interest with God and the
concerns of its eternity, that I ever heard of any of those subordinate
reformations which I aforetime made the earnest and the zealous, but I
am afraid at the same time the ultimate, object of my earlier
ministrations." 1 My object in adducing this remarkable experience is to
show an instance how the preacher who withholds the doctrine of the
cross and the immediate reconciliation with God, which must always go
along with it, whether the silence is due to the fact that the
preacher's own mind has never adequately been awakened to discern its
value, or acts upon a system of reserve without making the central
doctrine of Christianity bear on man's relation to the Judge of
all—fails to wield any power. The opposite doctrine awakens souls, is
associated with the Holy Spirit, and plants or propagates the Church.

I shall briefly advert to THE SPIRIT'S WORK IN A RELIGIOUS AWAKENING.
Though this cannot be made the subject of human calculation, we find it
occurring sometimes in a con tinuous ingathering of individuals,
sometimes in a multitude of simultaneous conversions, or in great
movements which carry with them the marks of a genuine work of the Holy
Spirit. Many things may occur of a mixed character in an exciting period
of religious effervescence. The opinion of a large class, who betray a
lack of spiritual discernment and an incapacity to form a judgment as to
its nature and tendency, will always be received with little deference.
They who are wedded to a theory of development, are in danger of denying
any interposi tion of the Spirit from on high. Others, embarrassed by a
system of sacramental grace by which they allow their minds to be
swayed, mistake a movement which overleaps these barriers and marches
forward in a path of its own. And having adopted a principle with which
a religious awakening on a large scale will not coincide, they run the
risk of denying it as a legitimate religious phenomenon. Any system
which

has no place for the universal priesthood of believers is prone to look
askance on an outpouring of the Spirit connected with the immediate
action of the Church's living Head on His

o

disciples. An awakening of this more general kind consti tutes for the
most part a new epoch with a well-defined peculiarity, and is replete
with great results. The gleaner in Church history, at a subsequent
stage, estimates its influence on thought, on action, and on
ecclesiastical life as at the Reformation, when the effusion of the Holy
Spirit was more marked than at any previous period from the apostolic
age. The effusion of the Spirit in the Puritanic age, followed as it was
by the cognate movement of Spener and Francke in the German Churches,
exercised an influence, the force of which continued long, nay,
continues to this day. The great awaken ing of last century, pervading
England, Scotland, and America, under Whitefield, Wesley, and Edwards,
gave rise to those Bible, missionary, and tract societies which still
continue in the Churches. Only under such influences can a solvent be
found powerful enough for producing such results.

The work of the Spirit, wherever it occurs, requires to be discriminated
from its accompaniments and from the counter feits that may be expected.
It is asked, Can these be genuine cases of conversion where the whole is
effected in an hour, and where the mind passes with astonishing rapidity
from deep conviction to triumphant faith ? We reply, it is not a
question of time, but of thoroughness and intensity. That a man, and a
multitude of men, may under the overwhelming pressure of conviction
consequent on a manifestation of God's holiness and inviolable law, and
of that utter ruin and boundless guilt in which men are involved, be
shut up by the Spirit to Christ within the space of an hour or two,
while not a characteristic of a sound conversion and not a single fruit
of the Spirit are found to be awanting, is proved by the evidence of
facts. But the sudden deliverance of the converts from the dangerous
errors in which they previously lived, receives an explanation in the
same

THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE CHURCH. 251

way. At such a moment, when men come under deep convic tions, the
previous cavils against the doctrines of the gospel are found to pass
away like a cloud; the Arminian accepts election; the Arian, the Deity
of Christ and the atonement; the Eomanist, the sole mediatorship of
Christ, without hesi tation.

But it is further asked, How can cases of conversion be admitted, when
they receive impressions, amid their common avocations, suddenly and
without any special application of the word ? I answer, There is no need
for asserting that the word is not employed: as the sword of the Spirit,
the word is used in every case. The word, deposited in the heart from
childhood, and quickened by the addresses, conversations, or providences
which lead to the decisive issue, may have occupied the mind before the
convictions reached their climax.

Many things occur which all too plainly prove that it is necessary not
only to pray for an awakening, but for wisdom equal to the occasion when
it is imparted. Mere religious excitement is no unchallengeable evidence
of the genuineness of a spiritual awakening, nor any passport to the
confidence of the Christian community, unless it be conclusively proved
that divine truth—that is, the word of God in what may be called the
true outline of that word—was the means of pro ducing it. If not called
forth by the instrumentality of divine truth, it may be little better
than a spurious medley, or a spasmodic movement by mere human
appliances.

It is not to be expected, indeed, that no tares will be mingled with the
wheat, or that there will be no over-hasty admissions or over-confident
assertions as to numbers, no exhibition of converts prematurely thrust
into public notice, no censorious judgments, no noisy profession
followed by a fall. It would not be a work of God if there were no imita
tions, for where the Spirit builds a church, Satan builds a chapel. The
tests which Shepherd adduces in his treatise on

the parable of the ten virgins, or which Edwards employs in his work on
the religious affections, though they cannot be applied in the early
stages of a religious awakening, when the two classes cannot be
distinguished from each other, ought never to be absent from the mind of
those who are called to guide a religious movement.

These memorable seasons are to be hailed as interpositions of the
Spirit's power. " It may be observed," says Edwards, 1 " that from the
fall of man to our day, the work of redemp tion in its effect has mainly
been carried on by remarkable communications of the Spirit of God.
Though there be a more constant influence of God's Spirit always in some
degree attending His ordinances, yet the way in which the greatest
things have been done towards carrying on this work always has been by
remarkable effusions at special seasons of mercy." The Church's
ever-living Head knows how to usher in creative epochs, to rally His
people to some converging point through the lapse of centuries, and to
gather up under this powerful influence isolated opinions into one
consistent whole. When a former awakening has spent its force, when the
elements of thought or action previously supplied threaten to become
effete, a new impulse is commonly communicated by Him who interposes at
various stages to make all things new. The previous condition of things
is commonly such as renders a new sect or a new organization well-nigh
inevitable. In a dead or stagnant period, such as prevailed at the time
of the formation of not a few of the existing Churches, the spiritual
life found no welcome within the pale of the denomination from which the
separation w r as made. But when existing Churches take up the new life
by a process of assimilation, they are recruited by numbers and
refreshed by a new stream of divine life.

In a devotional publication of Neander, on our Lord's entrance into
Jerusalem, he points out that the kingdom of God

1 History of Redemption, Period I. part 1.

THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE CHURCH. 253

comes at first as the leaven or as the grain of mustard seed ; but that
when it has continued to work for a season in this hidden way, the
effect next becomes perceptible in great facts, which force themselves
on men's notice and form the great moving powers in the world's history.
He adds, to suppose that the kingdom of God must always be as the
leaven, would be as great an error as to conclude that the visible
results come first. Men look on with awe and wonder when some supply of
the Spirit, of which they can neither tell the laws nor estimate the
momentum, breaks forth from the kingdom of God and sweeps over the
community.

Without entering into other things involved in this theme, let me close
with a few words on two points which, more than any other, give tone and
colour to a time of general awakening.

​1. As to the peculiar mode of preaching, to which the instruments
employed are usually led, it largely partakes of the inculcation of
immediate conversion. While all the other truths are brought out
connected with law and grace, the ruin and the remedy, the occasion
naturally leads the preacher to urge the necessity of the great change,
and the duty of immediate compliance with all those awakening motives
that go to determine the choice. The criminality of every hour's delay
is enforced by the thought that it is another hour's rebellion. This
must be accompanied with the further state ment, that without the Holy
Ghost they cannot turn ; that they must, and yet cannot; that they are
under obligation, and yet helplessly unable;—a double motive brought to
bear upon the mind together, which has been remarkably owned in the
preaching of America, and fitted to drive from every refuge those who
choose for themselves some middle ground or debateable land where in the
meantime they may rest. At this point this preaching conies in with
overwhelming force. It shuts up the sinner under a twofold motive—of
obligation and inability. It compels action and dependence. It brings

a twofold force to bear on the secure. These two truths must go
together; for the one without the other deprives the enforcement of
conversion of its power. Withhold a sense of man's dependence, or tell
him that whenever he pleases God is ready to second his efforts, and the
entire force of every motive is removed. But tell him that all his
actions are at the best but the efforts of an enemy till his nature is
changed, and that God is, notwithstanding all these efforts, under no
obligation to any unconverted man; let him feel the force of both
motives,—the present duty, the awful issues that enter into his choice,
the utter inability to turn, the absolute free dom and sovereignty of
God to give or to withhold His renew ing Spirit,—and there is nothing
more calculated to shut up the mind to immediate submission. He must,
yet cannot turn. He must, yet cannot convert himself. Whitefield,
referring to the effects of this style of American preaching, says: "
After they have done all, God may deny them mercy. It is for preaching
in this manner that I like the Messrs. Tennent. They wound deeply before
they heal. They know that there is no promise but to him that
believeth." Such is White-field's testimony, than which we could not
have a higher. Dr. Griffin accounts for the numerous revivals in America
from the belief of an instantaneous regeneration, and the sinfulness of
every moral effort up to that moment, and the duty of immediate
submission.

​2. As to the peculiar mode of praying, we may say that in every season
of general awakening the Christian community waits just as they waited
for the effusion of the Spirit, with one accord in prayer and
supplication, in the interval between the Ascension and Pentecost. No
other course has been prescribed; and the Church of the present has all
the warrant she ever had to wait, expect, and pray. The first disciples
waited in the youthfulness of simple hope, not for a spirit which they
had not, but for more of the Spirit which they had; and Christianity has
not outlived itself. The attitude

THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE CHURCH. 255

of the Church in the first days after the Ascension, when the disciples
waited for the Spirit, should be the Church's attitude still. And no
more mischievous and misleading theory could be propounded, nor any one
more dishonouring to the Holy Spirit, than the principle that because
the Spirit was poured out at Pentecost, the Church has no need, and no
warrant, to pray any more for the effusion of the Spirit of God. On the
contrary, the more the Church asks the Spirit and waits for His
communications, the more she receives. 1

1 A remarkable passage on prayer, and on working by the power of prayer,
occurs in Foster's essay on the application of the epithet " Romantic :
" "I am convinced," says he, "that every man who, amidst his serious
projects, is apprised of his dependence on God, as completely as that
dependence is a fact, will be impelled to pray, and anxious to induce
his serious friends to pray, almost every hour. He will as little
without it promise himself any noble success, as a mariner would expect
to reach a distant coast by having his sails spread in a stagnation of
air. 1 have intimated my fear that it is visionary to expect any unusual
success in the human administration of religion unless there are unusual
omens ; now a most emphatical spirit of prayer would be such an omen ;
and the individual who should solemnly determine to try its last
possible efficacy, might probably find himself becoming a much more
prevailing agent in his little sphere. And if the whole, or the greater
number of the disciples of Christianity were, with an earnest,
unalterable determination of each, to combine that heaven should not
withhold one single influence, which the very utmost of conspiring and
persevering supplication would obtain, it would be the sign that a
revolution of the world was at hand."

THIRD DIVISION.

HISTORICAL SURVEY OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

IT only remains for me, in this last division, to subjoin as briefly as
possible a historic outline of the development of the doctrine of the
Holy Spirit, and a sketch of the dis cussions which it has undergone in
the course of centuries.

\*D

The history of this doctrine touches theology at so many points,
sometimes in connection with the Trinity, sometimes with inspiration,
sometimes with the doctrines of grace, at other times with the Person
and mediation of Christ, that, were we to attempt a survey of all these
debates, there is scarcely a point in the whole field of polemical
theology or Church history which we should not be compelled to traverse.
We must fix our eye on the salient points, therefore, and on the marked
epochs in the history of the doctrine, that we may not be engulfed in
details personal, dogmatic, or eccle siastical. History, with its
parallel testimony to Scripture, has a great importance which is not to
be ignored; and it must be borne in mind that certain points of the
doctrine at one time come more prominently into view, and others at
another; that this topic at one time acquires interest, and that it
falls again comparatively into abeyance.

In the very earliest Christian literature,—that is, in the Apostolic
Fathers,—and in the Epistle of Clemens especially, we find that the
allusions to the Holy Spirit are all in the interest of spiritual
religion, and by no means polemical (Clem. chap. xlvi.). The circular
letter issued by the Church of Smyrna after Polycarp's death is of the
same nature. The

whole doctrine of the Spirit was at that time practical. The doctrine of
the Spirit was accepted from the earliest age as au elementary truth in
connection with the baptismal formula by young and old, by learned and
unlearned. This formula was a rudimentary truth to every baptized man:
for there never was a time when a Christian disciple did not confess the
Deity and saving work of all the three Persons of the Godhead—that is,
when he was not thoroughly instructed as a catechumen in the doctrine of
the Trinity, and accepted it as a primary truth with the first
profession of Christianity. In the Creed, which was only an echo of the
baptismal for mula, the Christian Church, from the first, over all her
borders, never hesitated to declare: " I believe in the Holy Ghost," and
Christians were guided by this rule in the course of ages to find their
way through all the Trinitarian contro versies—the Church simply
appealing to that baptismal for mula, and applying it for the refutation
of every single error on the subject of the Trinity.

The doctrine of the Spirit was for a considerable time unassailed. The
early Fathers, having no occasion to define the topic, as was done at a
later time, simply speak of the Spirit as a divine Person. As regards
the article of the Spirit, the doctrine of the Marcionites formed a
marked anti thesis to what the Church had always maintained; and this
led to a style of language which the Nicasno-Constantino-politan Creed
retains to this day. The erratic leader of the sect, Marcion, in his
violent polemic against the Old Testa ment and the God of the Old
Testament, made use of lan guage disavowed by all Christian men. He
represented the Old Testament as the production of the subordinate God
of the Jews, and endeavoured to overthrow the entire Old Tes tament
revelation on the plea that it did not proceed from THE SAME SPIRIT that
animated the founders of the Christian Church.

As Marcion and his followers took up such an antagonistic

R

attitude to the whole Old Testament, the entire body of Church teachers
testified to the prophetic Spirit, and con fessed that one and the same
Spirit spoke in both economies, — THE PROPHETS by the Spirit foretelling
the Messiah's advent, and THE APOSTLES by the same Spirit announcing the
historic lact. The words which they put into the Church's mouth, and
which we find repeated in the Constantinopolitan Creed, were : " The
Spirit who spoke by the prophets." It is clear from the Patristic
literature that has come down to us, that from the earliest times the
Church had the doctrine of the Spirit in its substance and practical
bearing, though the points were not fully thought out, and the terms of
the later nomen clature were not as yet employed. The defects which we
shall have occasion to trace came in afterwards, and were mainly due to
the Greek philosophy and to the false adjust ments which were attempted
in regard to it.

We come next in order to the Christian apologists. Justin Martyr is an
emphatic witness to the distinct personality of the Holy Spirit.
Semisch, who devoted a life-long study to this writer, states that the
title " prophetic Spirit" occurs twenty-seven times ; the title " Holy
Spirit," thirty-two times ; " the holy prophetic Spirit," four times; "
the Spirit of God," four times; "the divine Spirit," three times; "the
prophetic Spirit of God," once ; " the divine holy prophetic Spirit,"
once. There is not so much said, nor so clearly said, of the third
Person of the Trinity as of the second. But the Spirit's personality is
clearly and emphatically stated. Thus he speaks of the explicit
confession of the Trinity in connection with baptism, when he says that
it was performed in the name of the Father of the universe and Lord God,
and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Ghost (1 Apol. Ixi.).
The same Trinitarian formula was used in the celebration of the Supper,
the officiating minister offering up praise and glory to the Father of
the universe, through the name of the Son and Holy Ghost (chap. Ixv.).
In the same first Apology (A.D. 139)

there are passages where Justin once and again denies the charge of
Atheism, and names as the objects of Christian adoration, the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. I shall adduce two of these passages, because they
are conclusive as to Justin's Trinitarianism: " What man of sound mind
will not acknowledge that we are not Atheists, since we worship the
Maker of this universe . . . and Him who was our teacher (TOP
SL&da-tcdXov re) in these things, Jesus Christ, Son of this true
God—holding Him in the second place ; and the pro phetic Spirit
(Trvevfid re 7rpo\<f\>r)Tiic6v\*) we with reason honour " (chap. xiii.).
The one God and the three objects of Chris tian worship cannot be more
explicitly exhibited, connected together as they are by a Greek particle
(re) which, as Hand 1 has proved, links together objects of co-ordinate
rank with a certain dissimilarity peculiar to themselves. -

The same thing may be traced in the well-known passage which has
received so much discussion from Eomanists on the one hand and
Unitarians on the other. But if we take along with us the passage which
we have just adduced, little difficulty will be found either in its
structure or its import. The passage is as follows: " Whence also we are
called Atheists. And we confess that with regard to such reputed gods we
are Atheists; but not with regard to the true God, the Father of
justice, temperance, and the other virtues, with out any mixture of
evil. But Him, and the Son (who came from Him and gave us instruction in
these things, and con cerning the host of the other good angels
following Him and made like to Him), and the prophetic Spirit
(•jrvevfj\>d re ro TrpofariKov), we worship and adore, honouring them
with reason and truth" (chap. vi.). That we have (1) the three Persons
of the Godhead linked together by the Greek par ticles (eKelvov re KOI
rov viov rrvevpd re ro rrpo\^rjriKov), is evident at a glance to any
true philologist. That we have (2) the well-known Greek expression of
two accusatives after

1 See Hand's dissertation on n.

the verb " to teach," the one denoting the person taught, and the other
the art and science in which he is instructed, can admit of little doubt
(8tBd\^avra ?5/xa5 ravTa KOI rov arparov}. Scultetus, followed by Bishop
Bull, was led by the true instinct of sound philology to see that this
sense alone satisfies the import of the words and the demands of the
connection; and they both pour out well-merited scorn on the Eomanists
who wrested them, and still wrest them, from their scope to countenance
the worship of angels, with a different degree of honour. This is to
make a fourth object of worship, and to thrust it in between the Son and
the Spirit. As I have already assigned the only admissible translation,
I need not refer to the rendering which construes the words so as to
intimate that Christ came teaching us and the host of other good angels.
That is the rendering of Dr. Samuel Clarke, who puts it thus: " Who came
forth from Him and taught these things to us, and to the whole host of
good angels." It will in that case be a declaration that the angels as w
r ell as we are instructed by our Lord. But that statement was by no
means in Justin's scope or design.

It has often been said that Justin confounds the Logos and the Holy
Spirit. But a more critical inquiry into his words serves to prove only
that these two divine Persons are in office closely connected, but not
confounded. Justin certainly held that the Father, Son, and Spirit are
from eternity, though he might not put his thoughts in the same definite
form that was used in subsequent times, either to define the generation
of the Son or the procession of the Spirit. But he was beyond all doubt
a Trinitarian, though he might not clearly bring out that the economic
Trinity presupposes the ontological Trinity.

​1. The doxologies to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which were
everywhere in use in the early Greek Church, furnish a conclusive proof
of the acceptance of the doctrine of the Spirit, and of the prevalence
of Trinitarian views.

Thus, in the narrative of Polycarp's martyrdom, the truth of which, as
given in the encyclical of the Church of Smyrna, and in nearly the same
terms by Eusebius, is above suspicion, the martyr declares in his
closing act of worship: " For this, and for all things, I praise Thee, I
bless Thee, I glorify Thee, with the eternal and heavenly Jesus Christ,
Thy beloved Son, with whom, to Thee and to the Holy Ghost, be glory both
now and through all ages to come." Basil, in his treatise on the Holy
Spirit, states that "the glory to the Father with the Holy Ghost" was a
familiar usage older than human memory, and that it was practised in the
Church ever since the gospel was preached (chap. xxix.). That a doxology
to the Holy Ghost implies a belief in His personality is self-evident,
because worship is never given to mere names or personifi cations. And
we may regard these doxologies as taking their rise in the most natural
way,—as, in truth, nothing else but the inward and devout response of
the worshipper to the baptismal formula. The Creed was the response in
the confession of the mouth, and the doxology was a similar response in
the devotion of the heart. Basil adduces another doxology of Africanus
from the fifth book of his Chronicon: " We render thanks to Him who gave
our Lord Jesus Christ to be a Saviour, to whom, with the Holy Ghost, be
glory and majesty for ever." Basil also quotes to the same purpose from
others—for example, a passage from Clemens which ascribes life to the
distinct Persons of the Godhead (£?} 6 @eo9 KOI o icvpios 'J\^croO?
Xpicrros, Kal TO irvev\^a TO ayiov] ; and another passage from the
doxology introduced into the Church of Neo-Csesarea by Gregory
Thaumaturgus: " Glory to God the Father and Son, with the Holy Ghost"
the import of which, as Gregory was careful to set forth in the
Confession of Faith preserved in the Church which he formed, was to
confess a perfect Trinity in glory, eternity, and power, without
separation or diversity of nature. And in answer to Aetius, who would
argue for a disparity in the Persons, Basil

is at pains to prove that an equality of honour was intended by the
terms, and a full belief that the Spirit possessed the same divine
nature. Ity the use of these doxologies two things were intimated. The
Persons were held to be distinct because they were distinctly
worshipped, and all the three Persons to whom the glory is ascribed must
have been regarded as participating in the same numerical divine
essence.

​2. The supernatural work of the Spirit in the inspiration of the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament was never exhibited with greater
clearness and force than by the early Fathers of the Greek Church. The
impieties of Marcion and the Gnostics induced them to mature and
formulate their views. They vindicated the apostles' authority and the
plenary inspiration of the Spirit with a fulness of conviction and
energy such as has rarely ever been evinced, and certainly never
surpassed in any other quarter. The ordinary opera tions of the Spirit,
as we shall see, have been much more correctly and fully displayed in
other schools which were less under the spell of philosophic systems and
sacramental grace. But nowhere has the miraculous gift of the Spirit in
inspiring prophets and apostles been more amply displayed. Thus Justin
Martyr, in speaking of the sacred writers as a stringed instrument,
says: " Their task was but to surrender them selves wholly to the
working of the Spirit of God, that the divine plectrum descending from
heaven might make use of holy men as of a harp or lyre, in order to
reveal to us the knowledge of divine and heavenly things." With not less
point Irenseus says of the Scriptures: " They are spoken by the Word of
God and His Spirit; while we in the degree in which we are inferior, and
stand at the greatest distance from the Word of God and His Spirit, are
in need of the knowledge of His mysteries." And again: " The Logos has
given us a fourfold gospel which is held together by one Spirit."

The quotations which have been collected from the Greek Fathers on the
subject of inspiration by Lardner, Tollner, Eudelbach, and Westcott show
how the early Church regarded the Scriptures as the Spirit's wonderful
work. Thus Origen, speaking of the perfection of Scripture in connection
with inspiration, says: " The sacred books are pervaded by the fulness
of the Spirit. There is nothing either in the prophets, or in the law,
or in the Gospels, or in the Epistles, which does not spring from the
fulness of the divine majesty." The mode in which the Greek Fathers
often in troduce a quotation by omitting the human writer and naming the
Holy Spirit as the real author, is one of their most marked
peculiarities: " As the Holy Ghost saith." The importance and value of
all parts of the Scriptures, as the productions or words of the Holy
Spirit, are constantly asserted. Thus, to mention Origen, we find him
saying: " We can by no means say of the writings of the Holy Ghost that
there is anything superfluous or idle in them, although many a thing may
appear dark to many."

​3. But the Greek writers, it must be admitted, labour under great
defects. Of the ordinary operations of the Holy Spirit they have little
to say. The remarks of Semisch embody a criticism which, however
depreciatory it may seem to the literature of the Greek Church, cannot
be regarded by any one who is largely conversant with that literature on
the subject of the Spirit's inward operations as either prejudiced or
unjust. " When treating of this subject," says Semisch, " they seem
embarrassed and perplexed. They felt them selves obliged by the Biblical
writings, and especially by the baptismal formula, to place the Spirit
as a third object of devotion; but, in truth, they knew not how to bring
this object into a living connection with their existing theology ; they
were kept in constant vacillation on the question, What position ought
to be assigned to the Spirit in His relations to the Father and Son—to
the world—and especially to the

work of redemption." A little farther on, Semisch says of Justin Martyr,
to whom his remarks were meant more ex pressly to apply: " Of a
continued operation of the Spirit on Christians he has nothing to say;
he also regards the heathen-world as hermetically sealed against it."

Some may regard that estimate as prejudiced and one-sided. But it is the
testimony of a man whose judgment, from long and sustained inquiries, is
entitled to great respect; and every one who knows the Greek Fathers
will so far agree with him. A difference obtained between the Eastern
and Western Church, as will afterwards more fully appear. The Greek
apologists, with somewhat superficial views of sin, and spell bound by
the Greek philosophy, from which they never fully emancipated
themselves, extolled Christianity as the absolute reason, rather than
God's remedy for guilt and sin. Thus Justin, who went from one
philosophical school to another in order to ease a restless mind and
pacify an aching heart, found what he sought in Christianity. But by him
it was largely viewed as the adequate relief and resting-place of the
soul, because it met his previous inquiries, and shed light upon
problems which were previously inscrutable.

To the Greek mind SIN was always too much an outward fact or a moral
infirmity rather than an all-pervading reign of corruption and guilt for
which an adequate remedy was to be provided. The Greek mind was
satisfied with a too super ficial discovery of the doctrine of sin. And
this goes far to explain why it is that they have so little to say upon
the Spirit's continued operations on the individual Christian. The Greek
literature, considered as an edifying and spiritual literature, is of
immensely less value as to everything bearing on the Spirit's work than
the writings of the school of Augustin, or of Anselm, or of Bernard, or
of Luther, or of Calvin, or of the Puritans.

The rise of MOXTANISM in Mysia between 157 and 171 forms the next fact
in the history of opinion in reference to

the Holy Spirit, and its refutation served a most important purpose in
the Church. As the supernatural gifts conferred by apostles had but
recently ceased, it was only what was to be expected in the course of
things that some enthusiastic Christian of weak mind but fervent piety
and zeal should appear to claim their restoration in his own person.
Montanus was just such an one, a man of extravagant opinions and ascetic
rigour, who lamented the prevalent laxity, and was carried headlong by
Chiliastic sentiments. His way was prepared for him by the common belief
based on what was deemed apostolic statements, that the Spirit of
prophecy should not be with drawn from the Church till the Lord should
come. Hence many were ready to listen to an enthusiast who should
arrogate the function of a prophet. And the crude utter ances,
ecstasies, and prophecies to which Montanus and his female associates,
Maximilla and Priscilla, gave expression,— however offensive to sober
minds,—found credit with many, and even with Tertullian. As to the
Montanist views, I shall touch only those which bear on the work of the
Spirit.

While they held the Catholic doctrine of the Trinity, their error
consisted in maintaining that the Paraclete who ani mated the apostles
was restored to Montanus; that it was necessary to recognise the
spiritual gifts in Him ; and that the Christian rule wliicli imposed a
full restraint on the flesh, and which could not be received even from
the apostles, was now announced by Him as the instrument which the
Comforter used for that purpose. He declared that for Christians mature
manhood was now attained, as it had not been attained either under the
law and prophets or under the gospel. These men held that all true
Christians have the Holy Ghost, that the rights of such as possessed the
spiritual gifts were paramount, and that all office in the Church must
make way for their exercise.

The discussions to which these views gave origin were im portant, and
the refutation of their extravagant first principles

lodged important truth in men's minds both as to the mode of divine
revelation arid as to the finality of Scripture.

As to the mode of a divine communication, we have frag ments preserved
by Eusebius of a work written by Miltiades, which aimed to prove,
against the Montanists, that a prophet could not speak in ecstasy, that
is, without the calm posses sion of his mental powers. This fact implies
that the Moutanist effusions must have been like similar effusions of
later times—turbid, fanatical, and confused. Tertullian threw his shield
over that excited mood of mind as not only necessary, but befitting in
one who was overshadowed by the divine power. But in saying so, he spoke
as the apologist of the system which he had embraced. The Church of whom
Epiphanius may be taken as the representative expressed a wholly
different view: " Let us," says he, " compare what is asserted by these
parties with that which is undeniably contained alike in the Old and New
Testaments, which is also seen and predicted in truth, and thereby test
what is true prophecy and what is false. The true prophet spoke with the
complete tranquillity of the mental powers, so that one thing followed
another in a certain order; he spoke by the Holy Ghost, and therefore
uttered everything with great confidence." We find similar sentiments
expressed by Basil: " Some suppose," says he, " that the prophets
prophesied in ecstasy, so that the human spirit was as it were
overshadowed by the divine. But this is against the premiss of the
divine inhabitation ; for how can the Spirit of wisdom and know ledge
deprive any one of his senses ?"

Another question was: Is the Church—since the canon of Scripture was
closed—warranted to expect any further im mediate revelations or
prophetic visions ? The ancient Church, as against the Moutanists,
answered in the negative. It was a question, not what God can do, but
whether He will, besides the written word, communicate any further
revelations of the counsel of His will. And the discussion of this
question

with the Montanists anchored the Church in the conviction that it is
rash and unwarrantable to expect any further dis closures from the
Spirit of God, and that immediate revela tions are rather to be viewed
as emanating from the adversary changed into an angel of light. To the
allegation that the Church ought to enjoy extraordinary miraculous
gifts, and that she has lost them by her own fault and through her own
unbelief, the answer then given was that extraordinary gifts were never
promised to the Church as a permanent inheritance, subsequently to the
closing of the canon. And that style of argument has been confirmed by
the unbroken experience of nearly two millenniums, attesting that they
were withdrawn, and that they are not to be regarded as forfeited by her
own fault.

We turn to the discussions which assailed THE DIVINE PERSONALITY of the
Holy Spirit. The truth on this point required to be vindicated against
two phases of error, known as SABELLIANISM on the one hand, and ARIANISM
or Mace-donianism on the other, which were in a certain respect
antagonistieal to each other, and yet at one in their ultimate ground.
There was a certain collision of mind between the two, but they occupied
the attitude of producing or stimulat ing each other. And they agreed in
regarding the divine Being as unipersonal, not Trinitarian.

As to Sabellianism, the theory of modalism, or the Trinity of mere
manifestation, it found its first utterance (A.D. 200) in Praxeas of
Asia Minor, who succeeded about the end of the second century in forming
a party, and even in gaining over to his views Victor, Bishop of Home.
This theory was accepted by Noetus of Smyrna, against whom we have the
valuable homily of Hippolytus. It was accepted by Beryllus of Bostra,
whom Origen reclaimed at a counsel held in A.D. 244. Above all, it was
resolutely maintained by Sabellius, presbyter of Ptolemais in the Libyan
Peiitapolis, who from the year 218 became the head of the party, and who
is described as the subtlest of the anti-Trinitarians.

A certain obscurity envelopes the origin of Sabellianism, which long
troubled the peace of the Church. It propounded the opinion that the
terms Father, Son, and Holy Ghost were but different names of a
unipersonal God. It was the first, or one of the first, errors on the
Trinity that got a footing within the Church} and it is the error to
which modern thought discovers a decided inclination to return. It was
borrowed in a large measure from the Gnostics or Cerinthians, who not
only denied a proper Trinity, but resolved all into appearance or
manifestation. These forms of error were outside the Church.
Sabellianism was the first anti-Trinitarian tendency that found access
within the pale of the Church, and became the occasion of introducing a
form of thought opposed to the most elementary truths of Christianity.
Within the Church's pale, Sabellianism sprung from the desire to solve
the mystery of the Trinity in unity by propounding the notion of a uni
personal God variously manifested, or a mere modal distinc tion in the
Godhead. During THE THIRD CENTURY it acquired a wide diffusion; and in
many quarters it was boldly asserted. On this principle, of course, the
Son and Spirit could have no part in creation, for they were not
yet—there could be no atonement on this principle, for there was no
other person of the Trinity to whom it could be offered; and the Holy
Spirit's power was nothing but a vague, baseless influence that did not
lean on a Mediator.

When Praxeas introduced the opinion that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
were but different names for one and the same Person, Tertullian, in a
treatise that has come down to us, assailed it with the utmost
vehemence, and so far influenced the person who originally taught the
theory at Carthage, that for a time at least he was brought to a re
cantation. The error soon broke out anew, and spread over the whole
Libyan Pentapolis, the territory adjacent to Tripoli, to such an extent
that, according to the statement 1 See Stillingfleet on the Trinity.

of Athanasius, the Son of God was scarcely preached in the Churches of
that district. Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, warned the leaders of
that speculation to desist from propa gating such opinions, answered
inquiries, and wrote letters to reclaim the Libyan bishops. And when
they persisted in propagating their Unitarian opinions, he prepared a
dogmatic treatise in which he brought out the personal distinctions of
the Godhead, and the necessity of asserting them, though with such a
want of due caution as laid him open to assault. Nor can all the
vindication with which Basil and Athanasius have too generously shielded
and defended him from those charges of Arianizing, which were made
against his statements, exempt him from merited blame. He prepared an
explanation in consequence of the remonstrances sent to him by Dionysius
of Home, which restored him to the confidence of the Church, and to the
reputation of orthodoxy. Sabellius was excom municated in A.D. 261 ; an
act of discipline that went far to check his opinions, and to bring back
the Church to the two ideas of Trinity and unity.

One fact presents itself to our notice in all these discus sions.
Whenever an error arose on the subject of the Trinity in the Ante-Mcene
Church, we find that the Fathers uniformly appeal to the baptismal
formula. That was regarded as the secret of their strength; and it
carried weight with ordinary Christians as well as theologians. Thus
Tertullian, in his address against Praxeas, proves that Christ required
His disciples to baptize into the Trinity and not into one of them (ad
singula nomina in personas singulas tingimur). There was no possibility
of resisting the emphatic language of that sacramental formula, of which
the express purport was that it must run distinctly in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Tertullian adduced, with
not less force, an argument from the passages which refer to the mission
of the Comforter, as affording the clearest proof of a Trinity in unity.
It was against the Sabellians that the

Church introduced the term PERSON in the ecclesiastical acceptation
which it has ever since retained. Athanasius emphatically declared that
he abhorred Sabellianism equally with Arianism. 1

The special controversy, however, on the DIVINE PERSON ALITY of the Holy
Spirit began with Arianism in the fourth century. SABELLIANISM and
ARIANISM were more closely connected than at first sight appears. With
an apparent antagonism, but an inner bond of connection, they acted on
each other with a reciprocal influence, producing and being

1 Nothing strikes the inquirer more than the eager desire evinced by the
modern Unitarians to appeal to the early Fathers negatively or
positively. Fond as they are of declaring that they stand on the
shoulders of the Fathers and Reformers, they find it necessary to
consider this early testimony, however little it serves their cause. The
attempt of Sand, the Arian, to make the early Fathers speak his
sentiments, was exposed by "VVittichius in his causa Spiritus sancti,
1678, and by Bishop Bull. The groundless statements of Curcellarus
received merited chastisement from the hand of Stillingfleet. The more
cautious appeal to the Fathers by Dr. Samuel Clarke was suiliciently met
by Waterland, Hurrion, Abraham Taylor, and others. The bold statements
of Priestley, on a subject where his information was far from extensive
or correct, received the most overwhelming refutation from Velingius,
Segaar, and Gavel in Holland, and from Bishop Horsley in this country.
One of the effective treatises on the subject is Burton's testimonies of
the Ante-Nicene Fathers to the doctrine of the Trinity and of the
divinity of the Holy Ghost, 1831. In the face of all this evidence, Dr.
Lamson, a Unitarian writer of some reputation, in his work, The Church
of the Firxt Three Centuries (Boston 1860), announces this as the
conclusion to which he has come : " The modern doctrine of the Trinity
is not found in any document or relic belonging to the Church of the
first three centuries. Letters, art, usage, theology, worship, creed,
hymn, chant, doxology, ascription, commemorative rite, and festive
observance, so far as any remains, or any record of them is preserved
coming down from early times, are, as regards this doc-trine, an
absolute blank." Whether that repre sentation is ignorance or reckless
misstatement I shall not take it upon me to decide—probably both. Baur's
elaborate work, in three elaborate volumes, Die Chrislliche Lehrt ron
der Dreieinigkeit und Menschwerdung Gottes in Hirer ijexchichtlichen
Entwicklung, is very far from being a reliable history of the doctrine,
not because he intends to be unfair, but because he makes for the
various writers a system which never had any existence except in his own
brain. The three erudite volumes always remind me of what Schiller said
playfully of himself, but which may be gravely said of Baur : " Ich
werde immer eine Schlechte Quelle fur den Geschichtsforscher seyn, der
Ungliick hat sich an mich zu wenden. Die Geschichte ist iiberhaupt ein
Magazin fiir meine Phantasie und die Gegenstande miissen sich gefallen
lassen was sie unter meinen Handen "Warden."

produced. Arius, teaching presbyter of Alexandria, would solve the
mystery in an opposite way from that which Praxeas and Sabellius had
adopted. Living in the heart of the Sabellian district at Alexandria,
Arius saw that the Sabellian theory was untenable; that it gave no
explanation of the pre-existence and creative agency of the other
Persons of the Godhead, and of their connection with the Old Testa ment
generally (A.D. 318).

The Ptationalistic bias of Arius' mind appeared in this, that he would
not allow distinct personality and co-ordinate rank to the three Persons
named in the baptismal formula. He would destroy the Trinity in unity ly
laying stress on the subordination of the second and third
Persons,—which, so far as a certain order of action is concerned, the
Church teachers never scrupled to admit,— and by denying their
consubstanti-ality. He held the relation of the Son and Spirit to be
nothing more than a created relation, and he thus showed that his mind
was swayed and dominated, as Sabellius' was, by the theory of a
unipersonal God. He vehemently con tended that Deity and derivation from
another person involved contradictory ideas. The numerous arguments
propounded by Arius, and especially by Eunomius,—who was by far the
ablest of the Arians, — as these are stated and referred to by
Athanasius, Basil, and Gregory Nazianzen, may all be reduced to two—that
the same ETERNITY and the same INDEPENDENCE cannot possibly be possessed
by a person who is OF or FROM another. There Arius paused, and
resolutely adhered to the mere dictates of his own reason. He maintained
as the only warrantable explanation, that the Father originated the Son
by the fiat of creation, and that the Holy Spirit was but the creature
of a creature. He dismissed in the most abrupt way the whole array of
Biblical evidence, which goes to prove that the divine essence,
numerically one, is possessed in common by Father, Son, and Spirit.

It is stated, both by Epiphanius and Augustin, on evidence

that seems liable to no suspicion, that Arias regarded the Holy Ghost as
a creature of the Son, that is, as the creature of a creature ; because,
according to his beliefs, the Son of God occupied no higher position
than that of a creature. It does not appear, however, that Arms at first
openly assailed the Deity of the Spirit. At least Alexander of
Alexandria, in the letter which he sent to the bishops of the Christian
Church expressly recording the erroneous views of Arius and of his
followers, makes no mention of this point. And the Nicene Creed,
directly intended to refute his opinions, contains nothing more on the
Holy Spirit than the simple statement which had been confessed in the
Church from the beginning: " I believe in the Holy Ghost." If we compare
the several statements that have come down to us, we may warrantably
conclude that, at the commencement of his career, Arius, having no
direct occasion to express his sentiments on the Holy Spirit, and being
challenged ecclesiastically only for his avowed opinions on Christ's
Deity, was content for a time to let the controversy be carried on in
connection with the topics which gave rise to it; and that it was only
at a later date, when pressed by arguments and demands that summoned him
to declare himself explicitly and without evasion, that his error on the
Holy Spirit, at least in its full extent, was at length brought to
light. This is confirmed by what is recorded in connection with
Athanasius' disputation with him. During the sitting of the Council of
Nice, Athanasius held a disputation with Arius, and in the course of
that dis cussion Arius declared without concealment or evasion his
belief that the Holy Spirit was but a creature. We are further told that
the proof which he adduced was the weakest that can be conceived, viz.
that the Father sent the Paraclete from heaven, and that all things were
made by Christ (John i. 3), leaving the inference to be deduced that He
was among the creatures that Christ created.

\\Ve come to the remarkable period between the First and

Second General Council (A.D. 325-381), a period memorable for the great
men who appeared in it, but equally memorable for the fundamental errors
that agitated and distracted men's minds, and for the indecision,
uncertainty, and unsettled opinion on the work and agency of the several
Persons of the Godhead. After the divine Sonship of Christ had been
asserted, the next fifty years may be described as a chaotic period,
when men's minds were in many quarters perplexed and bewildered on the
subject of the Holy Spirit's divine personality. It was only by slow and
measured steps that the opinion of the Church on the doctrine of the
Holy Spirit — under the guidance of her living Head — came to acquire
consistency and calm rest. But she had to pass through a fiery trial.

The principal assailants of the Deity of the Spirit were the Macedonians
(Trvev/jLarofia\^oi), called also Semi-Arians, be cause they denied the
Deity of the Holy Ghost, even while they admitted the divine dignity of
the Son. The founder of this sect was Macedonius, a man in no way
venerable, who obtained the episcopal dignity by bloodshed, and who,
after an unworthy occupancy of the post for a year, was ejected from it
amid sedition and turmoil. It was after his deposi tion that he
propounded his heresy, which consisted in denying the Spirit's Deity,
and in proclaiming Him to be a mere creature, though it does not appear
that he and his followers had arrived at any firm opinion as to the
created nature, angelic or super-angelic, which ought to be ascribed to
Him. The grounds on which the Macedonians assailed the Deity of the Holy
Spirit were much the same with those which the Unitarians have urged in
more recent times, but scarcely with the amount of ingenuity and
plausibility which the latter have displayed.

Before the Second General Council was assembled, the arguments of the
Macedonians (irvevfiaro\^a\^oi) were fully confuted by Athanasius,
Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Gregory

s

Xyssen. They drew out the proof for the Deity of the Holy Spirit, much
in the same way as they had used in establish ing the supreme Deity of
the Son, by texts ascribing DIVINE

DIGNITY, OMNIPOTENCE, OMNIPRESENCE, and OMNISCIENCE to

Him, and especially from THE BAPTISMAL FORMULA, because a creature could
not be put into the formula as of co-ordinate rank with the Father and
the Son. And Athanasius brings out that the Father works all BY the Son
IN the Holy Spirit.

In the strangely agitated period which preceded the calling of the
Second General Council, the part which Basil acted was that of
concession and of moderate demands. He was content if, in the eager
efforts which were put forth to reclaim the Semi-Arians, they could be
brought to declare that the Holy Spirit was not a creature, even though
they did not take the positive ground of asserting His supreme Deity. To
some, Basil's action has always, down from his own time to this day,
seemed to argue the character of a trimmer; to others, it seems the part
of a wise Church leader. His maxim was as follows : " Union will take
place if we adapt ourselves to the weak, and do not provoke the minds of
men. As many speak against the Holy Ghost, I request that you will
reduce them as far as lies in your power to a small number. They icho
confess that the Holy Ghost is not a creature, receive into your
society, in order that the blasphemers alone may be left; and either
reduce them to the truth by shame, or, if they remain in their sin,
attach no more weight to the insignificant number. Let us require
nothing further ; let us lay before them the Nicene Confession, and if
they assent to it, let us ask them to call the Holy Ghost not a
creature. He who confesses this, let him be received into the Church. I
think we should require no more " (Epist. cxiii.).

Some ecclesiastics to whom Basil's conduct was an enigma and a cause of
anxiety made representations to Athanasius

regarding it; and the letters in reply which have come down to us
sufficiently attest that Athanasius entirely approved of the measures
which Basil had taken. " I wonder," said Athanasius, "at the audacity of
those who presume to reproach our beloved Bishop Basil, the true servant
of God." " They may be assured," says he again, in writing to Palladius,
" that he is the glory of the Church, a combatant for the truth, and a
teacher of the needy; they must not fight against such a man." " He is,
I am fully convinced, weak to the weak, that he may gain the weak."

To show the state of that agitated transition period, a few facts may be
added. Basil tells us that some held the Holy Spirit to be neither lord
nor servant, but free (eXevQepo?). Basil himself distinguishes the
Spirit from the creature as follows: " The creature serves; but the
Spirit makes free. The creature needs life; but the Spirit is the
quickener. The creature needs instruction; but the Spirit is the
teacher. The creature is sanctified ; but the Spirit is the sanctifier.
Though you name angels, archangels, and all the super mundane powers,
they have their holiness by the Spirit." Basil says: " The Holy Spirit
is of God, not as all things are, but as proceeding out sf God
(-jr/joeX\^coj/)." And yet this eminent man, with not a few of the
orthodox of that period, while fully believing in his own mind the
supreme Deity of the Spirit, abstained for the sake of peace, and to
avoid giving offence, from insisting on calling Him God

Athanasius also, in his epistle to Serapiou, writing against the
Semi-Arians or Pneumatomachi, says in reference to those who make the
Holy Spirit a creature : " Is it not madness, then, to say that the
Spirit is a creature ? For if He were a creature, He would not have been
ranked in the Trinity, the whole of which is our God." He, in the same
epistle, strongly urges that the Holy Spirit is in God (ev ®ec3), and
that a creature is outside the divine essence (e\^wdev 7779 rov 0eov
overlap. He lays out the whole strength and energy of his

powerful mind to demonstrate how much the Spirit tran scends every
predicate of creaturehood, calling Him " the sanctifying and
illuminating life."

During the continuance of that Semi-Ariaii or Macedonian controversy,
which was as long as it was saddening and paralyzing, many were
completely unsettled and at a loss what to hold. Thus Gregory Nazianzen
states (Or. 37) : " Some say that the Holy Spirit is a mere energy;
others that He is a creature ; and others that He is God. And some will
not affirm that He is any of these, out of reverence for the Scriptures,
which, according to them, do not clearly indicate which of these He is.
And they neither do Him honour nor dishonour, but are very much in the
position of men who are indifferently affected toward Him. Some," he
proceeds, " acknowledged that a ternary must be understood in our
religion, but they so widely distinguished the Persons from each other
as to make one of them infinite in substance and in power ; the other
infinite in power, not in substance ; and the third circumscribed in
both."

For such a condition of things the definitions of the Council of
Constantinople in A.D. 381 offered a mental relief and satisfaction that
could not be expressed. The weary and agitated mind of Christendom—on
which such distracting controversies had been let loose—welcomed the
repose. The decision given by that Council—arid which at once entered
into the universal creed of Christendom—was singularly calm and
measured. It was appended as a mere addition to the Nicene Creed,
neither inserting the term HOMOOUSIAN nor the words VERY GOD OF VERY
GOD, which had been already applied to the Son, and leaving it to be
inferred that they were equally applicable to the Holy Spirit. The
addition made to the Nicene Creed on the Holy Ghost was simply the
words: " THE LORD AND GIVER OF LIFE, WHO PROCEEDETH FROM THE FATHER,
\\viio, WITH THE FATHER AND SON TOGETHER,

IS WORSHIPPED AND GLORIFIED, WHO SPAKE BY THE PROPHETS."

The whole tenor of that invaluable addition to the Nicene Creed
furnishes a clear though indirect proof that the Mace donian error,
against which it was meant to be directed, denied the supreme Deity of
the Holy Spirit. It does not appear what sort of created nature was
ascribed to the Spirit by that heresiarch. But the refutation, which is
contained in the simple enumeration of these positive predicates, is the
most complete that could have been devised. Some, indeed, from an
inadequate apprehension of its scope and aim, have expressed surprise
that in a creed expressly prepared against a heresy that represented the
Holy Spirit as a creature, the framers of the article did not in so many
words designate Him God. Others, putting a construction upon the tenor
of the article from what they know of Basil's mode of action, have
conjectured that the assembled Fathers abstained from the use of the
term GOD as applied to the Spirit, in order to avoid offence, because
the heretics could not endure the application of the term God to the
Spirit. Petavius appeals to Gregory Nazianzen's confession as regards
his friend Basil. There is no foundation for such a sinister view. Basil
had died two years before; and the bishops assembled at Constantinople
exercised—as the transactions of the council prove—an independent
judgment in this matter. They prepared the Confession on the article of
the Holy Spirit in terms directly antagonistic to Macedonius' error and
completely subversive of his opinions. A few words will suffice to show
this.

​1. Macedonius held that the Holy Spirit as a creature derived His life
from Christ; and he based his argument on a false interpretation of the
w r ords in the preface of John's Gospel (John i. 3). We are told by
Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Theophylact, and others, that Macedonius, in
order to prove that the Holy Spirit received His life, like any other
creature, from Christ, punctuated the two verses in an incorrect way,
thus : " All things were made by Him, and without Him was

not anything made. That which was made in Him was life." To obviate that
misinterpretation, the framers of the Creed inserted the terms: " the
Lord and Giver of life " (TO Kvpiov TO £Voo7roi6V), intimating that He
is Himself the source of life, and that it is He who imparts it in all
its forms to others who stand related to Him as His creatures.

​2. The Macedonians argued that if the Holy Spirit were true God, He
must either be begotten or tinbegotten; and as neither predicate is
given to Him in Scripture, He must be held to be a creature. Against
this argument the framers of the article inserted from Scripture the
words: who procecddh from the Father (TO e'/c TOV rraTpos
eKTropevofjLevov]. Their

intention was to show that the Holy Spirit might be true God without
being either begotten or unbegotten, and that this was the peculiar
style, according to Christ's own delineation, by which we are to mould
our language in speaking of the personal subsistence of the Spirit, and
through which we are to think our thoughts regarding Him.

​3. The Macedonians, the assailants of the Spirit's Deity, commonly
appealed, moreover, to an alleged fact, but which in reality had no
foundation, viz. that the Scripture nowhere commands us to adore and
worship the Holy Spirit. This was one of their chief arguments, as it
has been the main argument of the Unitarians of subsequent times. And
the Fathers of Constantinople expressly avowed the opposite in the words
which they inserted : " Who, with the Father and the Son together, is
worshipped and glorified " (TO av\^rrpoa-Kwov-pevov Kal
crvv&o\^a\^o/jievov).

​4. The last thing inserted was a point which, from the earliest times,
the Christian Church had always adduced as a proof of the supreme Deity
of the Spirit, and which was confessed in the first creeds, viz. that He
spoke by the Old Testament prophets (TO \\a\\ija-av 8ia TWV
TT/DO\^TWI/). This was the last clause of the article inserted in the
Con-stantinopolitan Creed.

Before proceeding with our historical sketch, t\\vo questions presented
by the critical inquirer demand an answer.

It is asked: Why did not the First Council, THE NICENE COUNCIL,
anticipate or preclude much of the painful dubiety which agitated men's
minds during the interval between the two councils, by pronouncing in
terms much more definite and express on the supreme Deity of the Holy
Spirit ? The reason was, that they could not fitly condemn an
undeveloped error, which Arius, indeed, cherished in his heart at the
time of the Council of Nice (for he regarded Him as a creature), but
which had not been so publicly avowed as to become the subject of
ecclesiastical action. Though the subsequent attack on the Spirit was
but the natural and necessary con sequence of the opinions which he
entertained, the Fathers at Nice could neither speak of it as an
actually existing error, nor act against it when it was but a possible
heresy. As to their own belief in the Deity of the Spirit, that is
evident enough from the three clauses of the Nicene Creed which relate
to the Trinity.

A second question which has a plausible appearance, when taken in
connection with the subsequent history, is: Why did the Fathers of the
Second Council, the CONSTANTINOPOLITAN COUNCIL, declare the doctrine of
the Spirit's procession in so defective a manner, merely saying : " who
proceedeth from the Father"? The reason was, that the Semi-Arians or
Macedonians, against whom the Council pronounced, main tained an error
which rendered it necessary to use language which should neutralise and
obviate that error, and which was of a nature entirely different from
those subsequent debates on the procession of the Spirit which were
carried on between the Oriental and Western Churches several centuries
afterwards. With the Fathers at Constantinople the one question was,
whether the Holy Spirit was supreme God or a creature. It was not the
later question, whether the Holy Spirit, CONFESSEDLY A DIVINE PERSON,
proceeded from

the Father, or from the Father and the Son (jilioque). If the Fathers at
Constantinople would set forth sound orthodox doctrine in contrast with
the new heresy, and so far only as the new heresy assailed it, it was
necessary for them to affirm that He WAS GOD BECAUSE HE PROCEEDED FROM
GOD, and received His essence from the Father by procession. This was
what the Creed declared, viz. that He proceedeth from the Father, and
was therefore true God, because by pro cession partaker of the Father's
essence. On the contrary, the Macedonians or Semi-Arians had changed
their ground. They had, as Arians, in the first step denied that the Son
was cousubstantial with the Father. Afterwards they held that all beyond
the circle of the Father and the Son WAS A CREATURE OF THE SON, and
consequently that the Holy Ghost was created by the Son. The Semi-Arians
were thus obliged, according to their principles, to deny that the Holy
Spirit proceeds immediately from the Father. That would involve His
Deity and participation in the divine essence ; and hence the Fathers of
the Constantinopolitan Council felt it necessary to assert, and
accordingly did assert, the opposite in the simple use of Christ's own
words, which were held to be conclusive of the whole question: u-Jw
proceedeth from the Father (John xv. 26).

But none of the great men who at that age adorned the Greek Church
entertained any doubt that the Spirit proceeds not only from the Father,
but from the Son. I do not anticipate the history of this discussion
which agitated the Eastern and "Western Church at a later day. But in
con nection with the peculiar expression of the Constantinopolitan
Creed, " who proceedeth from the Father," it is only fitting and
appropriate to remark—what all students of this remark able period will
admit—that the peculiar phrase employed in the Constantinopolitan Creed,
enlarged at a later day by the addition of the filioquc to meet the
views of the West, and resolutely retained in its original form in the
East,—when

viewed in its true significance before that angry controversy began,—was
so expressed in order to meet the Semi-Arians, who wished to reduce the
Spirit to the rank of a mere creature.

HISTORIC SURVEY OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE PROCESSION OF THE SPIRIT.

This expression means, according to the opinion of the Greek and Latin
Fathers who employ it, that the Spirit receives His essence and
personality from Him from whom He proceeds (John xv. 26), just as the
Son is said to receive His personality from the Father by whom He is
begotten. The Son is from the Father alone, and on this account is
called the Only-begotten of the Father; whereas the Holy Spirit, the
Spirit of the Father and the Spirit of His Son (Gal. iv. 6), is
warrantably held to have His essence and personality from both. Though
it is nowhere expressly said in the Scripture that the Spirit proceeds
from the Son, yet no one who submits his mind to the evidence supplied
by many passages can doubt that the thought is diffused through the
entire Biblical testimony on the subject. But as to THE HISTORY of the
doctrine, we may affirm that there are three epochs, which may be
identified with the three names of ATHANASIUS, THEODORET, and PHOTIUS,
in Greek theology on the question before us.

In the FIRST EPOCH, that is, from the rise of Greek theology till the
time of Epiphanius (t 403), the received opinion, shared equally by the
writers of the East and West, was that the Spirit proceeds from the
Father and the Son.

Didymus, a monk of Alexandria, blind, but a man of ex traordinary
learning, composed a work in three books on the Holy Spirit, translated
into Latin by Jerome, in which he writes: " Christ said of the
Comforter, ' He will not speak of Himself, but shall receive of
mine,'—that is, because He is

not of Himself, but of the Father and me,—for His personality (hoc enim
quod subsistit) He has from the Father and me " (Book II.). Epiphanius
explicitly says: " If Christ is be lieved to be from the Father, God of
God, so the Spirit is believed to be from Christ, or from them both" (TO
Be Trvevpa ayiov Trapa afiforepoov') (Anc. § 70, 71). Gregory Xyssen and
Basil in like manner use the same language in various passages, as has
been repeatedly proved by those who know their works, and who have
always been profoundly struck by the fact that the Greek Church never
had any scruple in her best days, and when she had her greatest divines
in the fourth century, in speaking of the procession of the Spirit from
the Son as well as from the Father. Athanasius says that " the Holy
Spirit has the same order and nature in relation to the Son that the Son
has to the Father" (ad Sera2). § 21); "along with the Father, the Son is
the fountain of the Holy Ghost" (Ari. § 9). These quotations, which
might be indefinitely multiplied, leave no room to question the
theological opinion of that first epoch in the Greek Church. Before we
pass from this epoch we may adduce the words of Augustin as a witness in
the Western Church to the same effect in those remarkable elucidations
of the Gospel of John, which he has supplied in a series of 124
tractatus. In the 99th Exposition, taking up the procession of the
Spirit with his usual profoundness, he declares again and again that it
is both from the Father and Son; and he lays down a position which
Anselm several centuries afterwards handled with consummate power, both
in his oral discussion with the Greeks and in his treatise on the
procession. Augustin asks: " If, then, the Holy Spirit proceeds from the
Father and the Son, why did the Son say: He proceedeth from the Father?"
To that question he replies: "A quo autem habet Filius ut sit Deus (est
enim de Deo Deus) ab illo halct utiqiie ut etiam de illo procedat
Spiritus Sanctus: ac per hoc Spiritus Sanctus ut etiam de Filio procedat
sicut

procedit de Patre, ab ipso habet Patre." Not only so : when Christ says,
" who proceedeth from the Father," it must be borne in mind that,
according to the uniform tenor of Christ's teaching, He refers all to
the Father because He Himself, as the only-begotten Son, is of the
Father, and thus He has it from the Father that the Spirit proceeds from
Him, the Son.

The SECOND EPOCH in Greek theology, in which we find voices raised for
the procession FROM THE FATHER ONLY, begins with the Council of Ephesus
in A.D. 431. Theodore, in the creed drawn up by him, to which attention
was directed by that Council, declared that the Holy Spirit did not
receive His subsistence through the Son (ov&e Bi vlov vTrdpgtv
64X17\^)09). Theodore qualified many things, and was per mitted to close
his career in the Church notwithstanding all the crude and divergent
views to which he had given utter ance. Not long afterwards, when Cyrill
launched his anathe-matisms against Nestorius, he revived the subject by
saying: " If any one shall not confess that the Spirit by whom He
wrought miracles was His own, let him be anathema." To that Theodoret,
the attached friend of Nestorius, replied in a defiant attitude: " That
the Spirit is the Son's own Spirit we shall confess and accept as a
pious utterance, if he meant of the same nature and proceeding from the
Father; but if he meant that He has His subsistence from the Son or by
the Son (o\>5 e'£ vlov, rj BL vlov rrjv inrdp\^iv e\^ov}, we repudiate
it as blasphemous and impious" (Theod. on Cyrill's Anathe-matisms).
Though it is confessedly difficult to trace or conjecture the purpose
which prompted that resolute attitude of THEODORET, he was the first who
openly avowed that the Holy Spirit is not of the Son, nor by the Son,
but from the Father only. The opinion was not at that time generally
accepted or approved in Greek theology. Men were for a long time left to
a free judgment upon the question. Opinion was in process of being
decidedly formed in the West, under

the influence of Augustin, in favour of the procession from the Son as
well as from the Father.

"We come to the controversy on the filioquc, that is, the addition from
the Father and the Son, which after centuries of polemical discussion
ended in the permanent disruption of the Greek and Latin Church. The
Western Church, in accordance with the views of Augustin, laid emphasis
on the procession from the Father and the Son, and naturally wished to
elevate the doctrine to confessional authority in the Creed. But how was
that to be done ? Instead of effecting it by a Council of the whole
Church, the only competent way, and by a common understanding, it was
introduced into the Xicreno-Constantinopolitan Creed by the arbitrary
and un authorized addition of the filioque at the Council of Toledo,
A.D. 589, under King Reccaredus, who had abandoned Arianism from an
enlightened preference for the orthodox faith. From that time the third
article of the Creed was always read and chanted in Spain, France, and
Germany with this addition. When the Greeks became acquainted with this
fact, they not unnaturally charged the Latins with the falsification of
the Creed, and with an unwarrantable addition without the concurrence of
the entire Christian Church. The Western Church had the truth, but their
mode of action was unwarrantable. Instead of interpolating the
Creed,—which was the less unwarrantable from the fact that the clause so
altered was expressed in the very words of Scripture,—their proper
course was to have taken another part of Scripture which ascribes the
procession to the Son as well as to the Father. Had they, for example,
inserted such a clause as this: " Who is the Spirit of the Son as well
as of the Father," and had an Ecumenical Council inserted it, they might
possibly have forestalled the schism, or at least have removed the
occasion. As it was, the action of the Latins cannot be vindicated. For,
though the doctrine that the Holy Ghost proceedeth from the Son as well
as from

the Father is undoubtedly well-founded, the Latins, instead of presuming
to interpolate the Creed of the entire Church, should have recollected
that the Nicaeno-Constantinopolitan Creed was everywhere accepted; that
not a word could warrantably be altered without the general concurrence
of the entire Church; and that such an arbitrary enlargement must be
offensive to their Oriental brethren. The addition first made in Spain
was generally received in the West, in France, Italy, and England. Leo
III., however, who was raised to the Papal dignity A.D. 795-816, when
appealed to for per mission to insert the filioqiie in the repetition of
the Creed, firmly refused, from the earnest desire which he always enter
tained to be in friendly relations with the Greek Church. To show how
firm his purpose was,—a purpose from which he was not to be moved even
by Charlemagne, who defended the filioqiie, —Leo caused the unaltered
Creed to be engraved on a silver plate for the Church of St. Peter in
Borne. But the addition had been made, and was not to be undone. The
Churches in Spain, France, and elsewhere sung the Creed with this
addition. What Pontiff was prevailed upon to permit the addition is not
certain; for different writers have given different names. Petavius says
correctly that it is not known by whom the concession was made. Nor did
the preparation of the Athanasian Creed, as it was un warrantably
called, improve the matter. The opposite senti ment was diffused by it
throughout all the East.

The controversy soon became A DOGMATIC ONE. The Greeks now actually
began, as a body, to deny the procession of the Holy Spirit from the
Son. And the acrimony as well as disingenuous artifices which speedily
ensued from heated minds, the assumptions on the one side, and the
violent antagonism on the other, form a sad chapter of ecclesiastical
history. Not a few of the Greek writers, though they con stantly
rejected the phrase " procession from the Father AND the Son," yet
acknowledged " a procession from the Father

THROUGH the Son;" and they explained it sometimes in one way and
sometimes in another way. But for the most part they would not admit
that anything more was indicated

than AN ECONOMICAL RELATION or THE IDEA OF MISSION. TllUS

John Damascen puts the matter in the following way: " We believe in one
Holy Spirit in all things like the Father and the Son—proceeding from
the Father and dispensed \~by the Son" (Ortli. F. c. 10).

What may be called THE THIRD EPOCH in Greek theology, took its rise with
FHOTIUS, who wrote on the procession according to the current view of
the Greek Church, and con demned as blasphemous the opinion entertained
in the West (A.D. 867). He brought together all the arguments which
could be adduced for his side of the question. But they are inferential,
presumptuous, and little better than vain logic applied to a theme
beyond the scope and application of mere logical deduction. This so
offended the Latin Church, that the addition to the Creed, hitherto used
only in Spain, France, and Germany, was now openly accepted everywhere.
The division inevitably assumed the form of a schism about the year
1054. But a new necessity arose, of a national kind. Though there had
always been individuals among the Greeks who had concurred in sentiment
with the Western theology on the doctrine of the procession, a new
element came into operation. The Greeks were harassed by the Turks on
every side; and as it began to be apparent that the Eastern Empire could
not for a long time support itself against these powerful and constantly
advancing enemies without help from the West, they made eager and
repeated requests for help. They sent ambassadors to the Council of
Constance (1414-1418), and also to the Council of Basil (1431-1449), but
they effected nothing. Only on one condition could help be accorded—
that the Greeks should be reunited to the Western Church. To bring this
about, every effort was used—from the effect of fear on the one side,
and ambition on the other. At length

Engenius IV. called a council at a time when the Turks threatened to
accomplish the overthrow of the Eastern Empire. To this council, known
as the Council of Florence, which first met at Ferrara at the end of
1438, and was transferred to Florence in 1439, the Greek Emperor and the
Patriarch of Constantinople anxiously repaired, in the vain hope of
receiv ing help from the West. But they were required to accept the
Western view of the procession, together with some points of Eomish
doctrine to which it is not necessary here more particularly to refer.
These conditions were accepted under the pressure of necessity, when it
was too late. But it may be useful to refer to the formula or article of
union, as it serves to show the true position of the whole question
which was disputed between the Churches. This formula, drawn up by
Scholarius, afterwards called Gennadius, was as follows: " Since we
Greeks hitherto supposed that the Latins affirmed that the Holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father and the Son as from two principles or by two
spirations, and did not affirm that the Father is the fountain of Deity,
viz. of the Son and Holy Spirit, we with much aversion withdrew both
from the addition made by the Latins to the Creed, and from their
communion. But now, being by the singular grace of God assembled in this
sacred and ecumenic synod in order to cement a sacred union between us,
after many questions ventilated on both sides, after keen discussions
and the adduc ing of many testimonies both from sacred Scripture and
from the Church-teachers, we Latins declare and profess that in our
affirmation respecting the Spirit's procession from the Father and the
Son we do not express it in the sense of excluding the Father from being
the fountain and origin of the whole, Deity — that is, of the Son and
Holy Spirit, or as if we believed that the Son received,not from the
Father that procession of the Spirit from the Sou, or as if we held two
principles or two spirations of the Holy Spirit; but we firmly believe
and pro fess that the Holy Spirit from eternity proceeded from the

Father and the Son as from one principle, and by one single spi ration.

" And we Greeks in like manner assert and profess that the Holy Spirit
proceeds from the Father, but we also believe and affirm that it is the
property of the Son that the procession should also le from Him, and
that the spiration be from both, viz. ly the Father through the Son
according to essence. And now in this unanimous profession we unite in a
mutual union and join hands."

This formula, drawn up in such circumstances, neither pleased all the
Greeks nor all the Latins. The emperor subscribed, and the majority
reluctantly followed, though some of the Greeks withdrew in disgust. And
on returning to Constantinople the Greeks were ill received, more
especially as the assistance promised by the Latins against the Turks
was never sent. The whole proved a failure, and nothing was actually
effected by all the negotiations of the council. Shortly afterwards
Constantinople was taken by the Turks (A.D. 1453), the Greeks describing
this as a divine judg ment upon them for the Florentine Council. On the
other hand, Bellarmine says that they were delivered to the Turks
because of this error.

The Greek Church, notwithstanding the reluctant conces sion which was
made by those who represented it at the Florentine Council, continued,
after the fall of Constantinople, to assert, with not less vehemence
than before, the position that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father
only. No probability exists that any change will be made by the Greek
Church, or that any proposal of this sort will ever be calmly
considered. The correspondence into which the Tubingen divines entered
subseojiently to the Reformation with the Greek patriarch, is of
importance only as bringing out this fact. The sad fate of the Patriarch
CYRILLUS LUCARIS, who had cordially accepted the distinctive doctrines
of the Protes tant Church, proves the same thing. The formula which

would have been accepted by him, that the Holy Spirit pro-ceedeth from
the Father through the Son (8t vlov], was at once branded with the
stigma of heresy by the Council of Con stantinople in 1642. Any attempt
like that recently made at the Bonn Conference by Dr. Dollinger and some
Anglican divines, in the line of the same formula, is only time and
effort thrown away in vain negotiation.

We hold strongly the view of the Western Church, which was asserted and
maintained by all the Churches of the Reformation; and it might be
important, did space permit, to examine the various grounds by which the
Greek Church seeks to confirm her opinion, and the replies which the
Greek theologians have produced to the arguments of the Western
theologians. 1 They mainly appeal to the fact that the Ecu menical
Council of Ephesus prohibited (A.D. 431) as unlawful any further
addition to the Nicpeno-Constantinopolitan Creed. They give no heed to
the allegation of the Western Church, that the addition was only with a
view to give a more precise explanation, and not to establish a new
dogma. The con stantly reiterated Greek reply is, Who gave the Latin
Church the authority to alter the accepted Creed of universal
Christendom ?

The keen feeling entertained in the Greek Church since the days of
Photius still continues. We find that, so late as the Encyclical issued
in 1863 at Constantinople, the doctrine involved in the filioque is
denounced as heresy. There is no doubt that the Greeks as a body abide
in this opinion, and speak and write upon it as a point of capital
importance, and as essential to their system of theology.

As to the importance of the doctrine from the Biblical point

1 The arguments of the Greeks for their side of the question are given
with great erudition and ingenuity by the Archbishop of Novogorod,
Procopovicz, in his Tractatus de Processione Spiritus Sancti, 1772.
Ernesti's erudite review of the book is replete with interest.

On the Latin side of the question, the most interesting historical work
is Walch's Historia de Processione, 1751 ; Pfaffius' tractate on the
same topic ; and Sweet's History of the Doctrine to the Death of
Charlemagne, 1876.

T

of view, this cannot be questioned. It will not accomplish anything to
say, with Grotius, from the Indifferentist point of view, that the
dispute is a mere logomachy. Its importance is such that it can neither
be dropped nor ignored, though Protestant theologians, such as Pfaffius,
Walchius, and others, who have fully traced the historic course of the
controversy, admit that the dogma belongs to the less fundamental
articles, and that it should not have disturbed the peace of the Greek
and Latin Churches. At the same time, these writers assert that he who
denies that the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of the Son, denies a truth,
though the error may not exclude him from the hope of salvation. It is a
delicate question: Was the error of the Greek Church of such a nature as
to destroy the foundations of the faith ?

Without entering into a sphere which, in truth, does not belong to man,
we prefer to advert to the disastrous conse quences of its
ecclesiastical denial. Every one who has fully traced the course of this
controversy historically, and perused the solid and massive literature
on the subject from such men as ANSELM, ZANCHIUS, and others, or read LE
QUIEN, or the collection of treatises compiled by LEO ALLATIUS, or still
more recently the publications of PUSEY and others, called forth by the
recent Bonn Conference, must feel how deeply the Greek Church has placed
herself in the wrong by the attitude which she has taken up. She has
acted under a one-sided and passionate feeling, which has operated to
her detriment and loss as an ecclesiastical body. The unction and
spirituality of the Church have been sadly affected to her disadvantage.

While calm inquirers must concede that unwise steps were taken by the
Western Church, and that her course of action was marked all too
evidently by precipitance and mistakes, we must declare with equal
emphasis that the Latin Church brought out and gave due weight to a
momentous truth which lies at the foundation of the whole mission of the
Comforter: How could the Son send the Spirit if the Spirit were not His
?

We might concede that the separation of the Eastern from the Western
Church can scarcely be vindicated, if the separa tion hinged on this
question alone. But there is another inquiry : Has not the denial of the
filioque, which withdrew the Greek Church from the ground occupied in
Athanasius' time by the whole Church in the East and West, operated to
the deep injury of vital religion in the East ? Has it not tended to
subvert, in the general sentiment of the Greek mind, the deep ground on
which the Lord Jesus, as Mediator, acts as the Dispenser of the Spirit,
and as the Baptizer with the Holy Ghost and with fire ? Has it not
operated in an unsalutary way, in raising a barrier between the living
Head of the Church and His people, considered as the habitation of God
in the Spirit, and on the whole spiritual life of the Greek Church ? Our
conviction is, that it has done so. So calami tous, indeed, have been
the practical results of denying the essential relation of the Spirit as
the Spirit of the Son, that we cannot fail to perceive them. The Spirit,
economically considered, is largely dispensed from the Son. And the
Greek Church has become much of a fossil, untouched by any of the
reformations or revivals that renovated the Western Church.

THE WORK OF THE SPIRIT.

Having sketched the course of opinion as to the Holy Spirit considered
as A PERSON OF THE GODHEAD, we come in due course to consider the
history of THE SPIRIT'S WORK as it was discussed and canvassed in Church
history in connection with the doctrine of grace. There are various
marked epochs to which we shall more particularly refer, such as the
testimony given forth in the time of the Pelagian Con troversy, and at
the Keformation, and also in the Puritan period—of all which it may be
affirmed that the clear and emphatic doctrine then declared on the
Spirit's work was accompanied with a memorable revival of the spiritual
life

of the Church. As it is by no means the aim of this survey to compile a
catena patrum, or to discuss minutely the point raised by Arminian
writers, such as Whitby and Bishop Tomline, how far the Christian
writers, prior to Augustin, can be regarded as giving an explicit
testimony to efficacious grace, but rather to notice the great
turning-points in the history of opinion, we shall only touch the
prominent questions as they arose.

There is a marked difference between the writers of the Greek and Latin
Churches on the whole subject of the Spirit's work or on efficacious
grace. From a vary early period a different view prevailed on this
mysterious subject. In the Eastern and Western Church the relation of
human freedom to the agency of the Spirit was, in some measure,
differently viewed. The chief emphasis was laid in the Eastern Church on
the freedom of the will or free agency (TO avre\^ovcnov) ; and they
spoke of a self-determining power in man even in his fallen state. On
the other hand, the chief emphasis was laid in the "Western Church on
the extent of corruption and the power of sin. This difference between
the Oriental and Western Church was at a very early period strongly
marked ; and we cannot fail to notice the germs of that peculiar
historical development which gave such a different aspect to them both.
The Eastern Church, neglecting to elaborate an anthropology which gave
due prominence to sin, and carried away with an airy notion of
metaphysical liberty unduly derived from the speculations of the Greek
philosophy, wasted its strength in vindicating for man what can never be
asserted in regard to him without a misconception of the ruin occasioned
by the fall. The pillars of orthodoxy in the Oriental Church maintained
a sort of synergism of the human will along with the agency of the
divine Spirit. They ascribed to man, in his present fallen state, a
choice between good and evil, and a co-operation on man's part in the
application of redemption. But in elevat ing human power they diminished
natural corruption. The Western Church was led into a far other path,
and penetrated

far more deeply into the doctrine of man's corrupt and fallen condition.
The Greek Fathers are defective, though it must be conceded in justice
to them that the vehement urgency with which they set forth free-will,
was primarily due to their dread of the determinist or fatalistic
theories of the Gnostics and Manichees, with whom they were surrounded.
Even where the Greek Fathers set forth man's corruption and the agency
of the Spirit, as is done more or less by Cyrill of Jerusalem, Gregory
Nazianzen, Basil, and his brother Gregory Nyssen, they also maintain, in
terms much too strong for a Biblical theologian, the power of the
free-will. Thus Chrysos-tom puts the matter: " God draws, but He draws
the willing one " (e\\fcei pev @eo?, e'X/ea Be Bov\\6fj,evov\^. That
defective statement was only too characteristic of the entire body of
Greek theology. They never attempted to solve the question, or to remove
the seeming antinomy between divine grace and free-will.

The discussions in the Western Church referred more to the ruin and the
remedy; and they both indicated the exist ence of a deeper spiritual
life as well as increased it. The discussions in the Western Church
attest that there prevailed far more profound views as to the continued
operation of the Spirit on the heart. In effecting this result Augustin
was, in the course of Providence, specially trained and prepared. He
rendered a great service at a critical time to the whole Church. For
some time subsequent to his conversion, he was not more advanced than
the writers of the Greek Church, and even less matured on the subject of
grace than Ambrose. His first treatise on free-will (A.D. 388-395),
which has come down to us, was meant to refute the Manichrean doctrine
to which he was once attached; and it is certainly very defective. He
intended it to counteract the dogma that man only acts under constraint,
and from a necessity which renders it impossible for him to keep from
vice arid sin. He imperfectly explains himself in reference to the
operation of divine grace, but by

294 THE DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

no means in antagonism to grace, as Pelagius did. About the time,
however, when he received the episcopate, a decisive change took place
in Augustin's opinions (A.D. 396). The Scripture text which was made the
means of leading his mind to the decisive change, which he ever
afterwards asserted, was: " Who maketh thee to differ ? what hast thou
that thou didst not receive ? Now, if thou didst receive it, why dost
thou glory as if thou hadst not received it?" (1 Cor. iv. 7). The
conclusion to which he came was, that " in conversion God out of the
unwilling makes willing ones, and dwells in those made willing;" and at
a later day, when reviewing and correcting the sentiments to which he
had given circulation by his pen, so far as they needed correction, we
find him saying: " I have erred in having maintained that the grace of
God consists only in God's revealing of His will in the declaration of
truth; but that to give assent to the preached gospel is our own work,
and that this lies in our power." And again : " I have erred in
asserting that it lies wiiliin our power to believe the gospd and to
will, but that it is the work of God to give those who believe and those
who will the power of operating." Now, all was ascribed by him to the
grace and Spirit of God, and nothing to man's natural power; and with
marked precision the doctrine which he held was brought out in the
prayer which called forth in Pelagius' mind the keenest antagonism and
the greatest repugnance: " Lord, give what Thou commandest, and command
what Thou wilt" (da quod jubes et jube quod vis).

Augustin was thus mentally and spiritually prepared when the Pelagian
error broke out. He took its measure from the first, and at once
directed all the energy of a great mind to counteract every position
which was laid down in vindication of the Pelagian dogma, which found
only too prepared a soil both in the West and in the East, and which it
was now imperatively necessary for the welfare of vital Christianity
resolutely to refute and overthrow. The error which Pelagius

maintained was that free-will is able by its own natural powers, without
the aid of the Holy Spirit, to convert itself to God, to believe the
gospel, and to be obedient to the law of God with the whole heart, and
thus, with its own voluntary obedience, to merit the remission of sins
and eternal life.

The great powers of Augustin were called forth by the Pelagian
controversy. His real aim was to prove and to assert the inward
operations of the Holy Spirit on the heart in conversion and in every
religious act; and the controversy, bespeaking as it does the remarkable
illumination of Augustin's mind by the Holy Spirit, was accompanied and
followed by results which have pervaded Western Christianity more or
less to this day. Of Augustin himself, in whom we see these opinions
vitally represented, we may say that subsequently to the reception of
those views in which his mind found its resting-place, his whole life
was a hymn of praise to the Spirit's saving grace, and a prayer for new
communications of the Spirit of Life. In all that bears on man's
relation to the Trinity, this remarkable man may be regarded as the
meeting-place where the streams of the past united, and were sent forth
anew to fertilize the future. Doctrinal truth on Eoman soil reached its
culminating point in him; and whatever afterwards attained doctrinal
importance, was in some way derived from the works of Augustin.

Pelagius, like all natural men, however cultured, only mis took the
things of the Spirit of God. His first principle was free-will. And as
to original sin, it was not in his system. He asserted that Adam's fall
injured his posterity only by the ill example; that grace facilitated
that which could be done without it; that nothing has moral significance
which does not proceed from an act of free-will; and that it was absurd
to hold that an innate perversity preceded every single act. His
conception of the human will was that it was always in a state of
perfect equilibrium or indifference between good and evil, and that it
returns as with a bound from any

sinful action to the same equipoise. He deemed it self-con tradictory to
speak of an evil bias or a tendency to sin, which is already sin. And in
affirming, as he did, that the will turns with equal ease to good or
evil, he made sin consist in actions merely, not in the nature. Such
views of sin obscured all due perception of the great truth that the
Holy Spirit must communicate a new life and anticipate the acts of the
will, and heal it of its disease and of the deep inherent ground of evil
which is in it since the fall of man. In a word, there is nothing in
Pelagius' utterances that give the impression that he w r as a
regenerate man drawn by a holy longing or aspiration toward God. The
central thought of Scripture, that man was made in the divine image, and
the temple of the Spirit, was reduced to a flat external ethical code
that prescribes single actions. The discussion began on Pelagius' side
with well-meant moral earnestness. But he had no con ception of the Holy
Spirit's operations on the human heart.

And when we inquire how an earnest moral nature like his, zealous
against corruptions and worldly compromise, could be possessed with the
pride, self-sufficiency, and elation which he betrays, the explanation
is, that he was profoundly ignorant of man's natural condition, and of
the indispensable necessity of the Spirit's regenerating grace. He had
never comprehended Christ's words: " First make the tree good." He
expected the tree to yield good fruit as it was. He had inadequate and
superficial views of sin, having never penetrated into the true state of
the heart.

It must be mentioned, as some explanation,—though it is no
palliation,—that the Greek Church from which he had drawn his general
culture and all his theological opinions in his earlier career, was very
superficial in all that sphere of doctrine and thought. So far as the
Church had expressed her views in the Creed, Pelagius had embraced all
the ecclesi astical doctrines on the Trinity and the Person of Christ
and the Deity of the Holy Spirit. He stood where Basil and

Athanasius and the two Gregories had stood. The meaning which he
attached to grace was the natural ability for good, the gift of the
posse. He held tlmt the will and performance were all the mans own, as
if he had never read Paul's words (Phil. ii. 13); and that by the right
use of human freedom man merited eternal life. Only when refuted by
Augustin's arguments did he allow that grace took in or was exercised
about the remission of sin. He allowed no renewing influence on the
will, nothing but an external aid. Hence, in writing to Innocent of
Eome, Augustin says: " Let him be sent for to Eome, and asked expressly
what he means by the term GRACE ; or let him explain his meaning by
letter: and if he be found to affirm the ecclesiastical and apostolic
truth, let him be fully absolved, and let us rejoice in him. For whether
he calls grace free-will or remission of sins, or the precept of the
law, he affirms none of those things which tend to conquer lusts and
temptations ly the supply of the Holy Spirit which He who ascended to
heaven has shed on us abundantly." These last words show in what sense
Augustin used the term grace, in contrast with the opposite opinion of
Pelagius. Nothing serves more to show the defective views of grace that
prevailed in the Eastern Church, than the fact that Pelagius was
acquitted in A.D. 415 at the two Synods of Jerusalem and Diospolis. The
great Church-teachers of the East, while admitting man's natural
sinfulness and the Spirit's agency, had continued for generations, as
Augustin did in his early theological development, to assign the
ultimate decision to the power of free-will. They never attempted to
explain the two sides.

Augustin's system had become the direct antithesis of this. Pelagius
laid all stress on man's free-will. Augustin laid all emphasis on divine
grace, which he understood as the effica cious and ever-continued
operation of the Holy Spirit shedding abroad the love of God in the
heart. Not that he denied free-will, for he maintained that IT WAS
ALWAYS FREE, BUT NOT

ALWAYS GOOD. His words in the third book Hypognosticon show how
free-will was admitted in ordinary things: " We acknowledge," says he, "
that in all men there is a free-will; for they all, indeed, have natural
innate understanding and reason; not that they are able to act in things
pertaining to God as to love and fear God from the heart, but only in
external works of this life have they freedom to choose good or evil. By
good I mean that which nature is able to per form, as to labour in the
field or not, to eat, to drink, to visit a friend or not," etc.

The point which Augustin discussed was ORIGINAL SIN AND FREE-WILL, or
the free-will after the fall of man. He proved that in and by the first
man the nature of all was radically corrupted (in detenus mutata), and
that we were all that one man (ille unus homo omnes fuerunt); that man
was left to the freedom of his will, and by an act of abused freedom pre
cipitated the race into the bondage of sin, from which no one can be
freed but by the grace of God. He held that by an ill use of freedom man
destroyed both himself and his free will. But Augustin is always careful
to draw a distinction between the nature or substance of man which is
good and the vitiating taint which has defiled it (Encli. vi. chap. 10).
With the fall from God freedom was lost. He did not assert that the will
was lost or the power to will, but that the true liberty of willing good
is lost, and in its place has come the peccandi neccssitas, or
inevitable course of sinning. Hence man can be called out of this state
only by the grace of God's Spirit, which consists, according to him, not
in the mere instruction of the understanding by truth, nor in the mere
remission of sins, but in the renewing operations of the Holy Spirit,
and in a new life of love. He describes it as creative, and as
transforming the entire man (Sp. et Lit. iii.). He distinguishes this
from everything proceeding from mere nature, and as the opposite of
original sin, which, according to him, consists in evil desire
(concupiscentia). Of this evil

desire, grace is the antithesis, consisting in holy love to God. One of
Augustin's deeply spiritual remarks is, that grace anti cipates the will
(gratia praevenit voluntatem), and that we do not speak of God as having
given grace, but in the present tense, AS GIVING GRACE —that is, ever
giving it. Even the longing for grace is God's work (volentem pnevenit
ut velit, volentem subsequitur ne frustra velit).

And when we inquire how grace, or the Spirit, stands related to freedom,
we find Augustin's answer expressed in words which have constantly been
re-echoed in different forms by Anselm, Bernard, Luther, and Calvin—viz.
that free-will is not made void, but established by grace (gratia sanat
voluntatem, Sp. et Lit. xxx.). But he allowed that still there were
remains of sin in the Christian. He says, in his refutation of Julian: "
The law which is in our members is put away by regeneration, and yet
remains in the flesh, which is mortal. It is put away,—for the guilt is
entirely remitted by the sacrament through which believers are born
again ; and yet it remains,—for it produces evil desires against which
the believer strives."

On the great question between the true doctrine of Chris tianity and the
deistical religion of Pelagins, nothing can be more explicit than
Augustin's testimony. Thus he says : " Neither doth a man begin to be
converted or changed from evil to good by the beginnings of faith,
unless the free and undeserved mercy of God work it in him. Let the
grace of God, therefore, be so accounted of, that from, the, beginnings
of his conversion to the end of his perfection, he that glorieth should
glory in the Lord. Because, as none can begin a good work without the
Lord, so none can perfect it without the Lord." And again : " It is
certain that we will when we will, but He causes us to will who works in
us to will" (De Grat. et Lib. Arb. chap. ii.). To the same effect all
the writers speak who imbibed Augustin's sentiments. Tims Maxentius
says: " "We believe that the natural free-will is

able to do no more than to discern and desire carnal or worldly things,
which may perhaps seem glorious with men, but not with God; but those
things that belong to eternal life, it can neither think, nor will, nor
desire, nor perform, but only by tJie infusion and inward working of the
Holy Ghost, who is also the Spirit of Christ." Fulgentius is not less
explicit: " We have not received the Spirit of God because we believe,
but that we may believe."

Augustin's unanswerable polemic had so fully discredited Pelagianism in
the field of argument, that it could no longer be made plausible to the
Christian mind. It collapsed. But a new system soon presented itself,
teaching that man with his own natural powers is able to take the first
step toward his conversion, and that this obtains or merits the Spirit's
assist ance. Cassian, a Scythian by birth, and a scholar of Chry-sostom,
holding the rank of abbot in a Marseilles monastery, was the founder of
this middle way, which came to be called SEMI-PELAGIANISM, because it
occupied intermediate ground between Pelagianism and Angustinianism, and
took in ele ments from both. He acknowledged that Adam's sin ex tended
to his posterity, and that human nature was corrupted by original sin.
But, on the other hand, he held a system of universal grace for all men
alike, making the final decision in the case of every individual
dependent on the exercise of free-will. The Massilians, as they were
called from Cassian's monastery, opposed and censured Augustin for
permitting himself to be carried to the opposite extreme from Pelagius,
and declared that he attributed too much to divine grace. Their
opinions, as we learn from the letter of Prosper to Augustin, and also
from the letter of Hilary, were as follows: they held that the first
movement of the will in the assent of faith must be ascribed to the
natural powers of the human mind. This was their primary error. Their
maxim was: "it is mine to be willing to believe, and it is the part of
God's grace to assist." They asserted the sufficiency of Christ's

grace for all, and that every one, according to his own will, obeyed or
rejected the invitation, while God equally wished and equally aided all
men to be saved. Prosper, in his theo logical poem, de in gratis, a term
which he applies to these men, brings this out with much force. Cassian
held that man's moral power for good is only weakened and enfeebled, but
not dead, and that he has still such a sense of his disease that he can
desire a cure (voluntas medicum quaerens). The entire system thus formed
is a half-way house containing ele ments of error and elements of truth,
and not at all differing

7 O

from the Arminianism which, after the resuscitation of the doctrines of
grace by the Eeformers, diffused itself in the very same way through the
different Churches. Semi-Pela-gianism represented conversion as
proceeding partly from man's free-will and partly from divine grace. It
puts them in juxta position, and the adherents of the system were some
of them more inclined to the one side, or to Pelagianism, while others
inclined more to the Augustinian view. It satisfied neither.

Augustin, who had triumphantly refuted Pelagianism, re ceived
intelligence of what was taking place at Marseilles from his faithful
Gallic scholars, Prosper and Hilary, and proceeded without loss of time
to direct attention to the new phase of error. He was soon, however, to
be removed from the scene of conflict to his everlasting rest. But he
had the opportunity in his treatises on " Predestination," and on " The
Gift of Perseverance," to prove that this half-and-half system was
untenable, and in the last degree mischievous. He showed that it must
lead men back to Pelagianism, if the orthodox faith was not accepted
from the heart. Cassian, with a view to secure a place for the merit of
works, had affirmed that man begins the work of salvation, and then
receives as a reward further grace and aid in the path on which he has
entered. It was easy to expose this unscrip-tural position, which led
back the mind to the Pelagian depreciation of divine grace. Augustin
appeals to the text

which had given rest to his own mind (1 Cor. iv. V), and also to Paul's
statements elsewhere (Rom. xi. 35 ; 2 Cor. iii. 5). He shows them that
their position implied that they would merit grace, by attributing to
man the first commence ment. He showed, moreover, the folly of a dogma
which ascribed to man the most difficult thing—the commencement of a new
spiritual life, and left to God's Spirit the easier task of merely
conferring an aid or assistance afterwards.

The principal error of the Semi-Pelagian system consisted in the fact
that grace was said to be given according to men's merits —that is,
according to the good use or right improve ment of the natural power of
free-will. But grace was often used by them to intimate nothing more
than the law and the prophets. After a century of discussion the inner
contradic tion of Semi-Pelagianism became apparent, and at the Synod of
Orange (A.D. 529) it was repudiated in a series of positions or
doctrinal statements, which may be said not only to have given this
heresy a decisive check, but to have exhibited the truth with a
precision, accuracy, and fulness than which we have scarcely anything
more condensed and valuable on this topic in the whole compass of
theological literature. Though it was but a provincial Synod, it came to
Jiave all the validity of an Ecumenical Council. It puts together the
results of the whole previous discussions on Pelagianism and
Semi-Pela-gianism, and has the further advantage of being specially
directed to the divine operation in the matter of regenera tion. I shall
subjoin the first seven CANONS of this memor able Synod, as containing
the soundest and most scriptural utterances on this momentous topic:—

" 1. If any man affirm that the whole man in soul and body has not been
corrupted by Adam's transgression, but that the body only is subject to
corruption, while the freedom of the soul remains unhurt, that man,
seduced by Pelagius' error, contradicts the Scripture, which says: ' The
soul that sinneth, it shall die.'

" 2. If any man affirm that Adam's transgression only injured himself,
but not his posterity, or that only corporeal death, the punishment of
sin, but not sin itself, which is the death of the soul, passed by one
man to the entire human family, he ascribes injustice to God,
contradicting the apostle (Rom. v. 12).

"3. If any man say that the grace of God is given at man's petition, but
not that grace produces the supplication, he contradicts the prophet
Isaiah, who says, and the apostle who says the same: ' I am sought of
them who asked not after me: I am found of them who sought me not' (Isa.
Ixv. 1).

" 4. If any man affirm that God waits for our will that we may be purged
from sin, and does not confess that it is due to the infusion and
operation of the Holy Ghost upon us that we desire to be cleansed, he
resists the Holy Ghost Himself, who says that the will is prepared by
God; and the apostle's testi mony, that it is God who worketh in us both
to will and to do of His good pleasure.

"5. If any one say that the beginning or increase of faith, and the very
movement of mind toward faith by which we believe in Him that justifies
the ungodly, and come to the regeneration of baptism, is in us not by
the gift of grace,— that is, ly the inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
correcting our will from unbelief to faith, from ungodliness to
piety,—but by nature, he is proved an enemy to the doctrine of the
apostles, as Paul says: ' He that hath begun a good work in you will
perform it to the day of Jesus Christ;' and again: ' To you it is given
in Christ not only to believe, but also to suffer for His sake' (Phil.
i. 6, 29). They who affirm that the faith by which we believe in God is
natural, describe all who are estranged from the Church as in a manner
believers.

" 6. If any man affirm that mercy is imparted to us when, without the
grace of God, we believe, will, desire, endeavour, watch and labour,
pray, seek and knock, and does not confess

that it is of the inspiration and infusion of the Spirit of God that we
can believe, will, or do any of all these things as we ought,—who merely
affirms that the aid of grace is added to the humility and obedience of
man, and does not confess that our obedience and humility is a gift of
His grace,—he contra dicts the apostle, who says: ' What hast thou that
thou hast not received ?' and: ' By the grace of God I am what I am.'

" 7. If any man affirm that he can by the strength of nature think
anything good pertaining to the salvation of eternal life, as he ought,
or choose or consent to the saving or evangelical preaching, without the
illumination and inspi ration of the Holy Spirit, who gives to all the
sweet relish in consenting to and believing the truth, he is deceived by
a heretical spirit, not understanding the word of God in the gospel:
'Without me ye can do nothing;' and that saying of the apostle: ' Not
that we are sufficient of ourselves to think anything as of ourselves'
(2 Cor. iii. 5)."

A historical succession of testimonies to the same effect might be
supplied from Maxentius, Fulgentius, Albinus, Gregory the Great, and
others, which would be found to be equally clear and interesting. But as
the object of this sketch is only to notice the salient points of
history, I shall refrain from entering into these details, and content
myself with quoting a few words of the treatise " on the calling of the
Gentiles," of which Leo has been supposed by many to be the author,
though the writer in reality is unknown. After saying that it would be
ruinous to be deprived of the Holy Spirit, the writer adds: " He" [the
Spirit] indeed, in the essence of the Deity, is everywhere and
all-comprehen sive, but is conceived in a certain manner to recede from
those whom He ceases to govern. And the cessation of His aid is to be
regarded as His absence, which that man madly thinks useful to himself
who rejoices in his good actions, and thinks that he rather than God
hath wrought them. The "race of God must therefore be owned in the
fullest

and most unqualified sense, the first office of which is that His help
be felt: " We have not received," says the apostle, " the Spirit of the
world, but the Spirit of God, that we might know the things that are
freely given to us of God." Whence, if any man think that he has any
good things of which God is not the author, but himself, he has not the
Spirit of God, but of the world, and swells with that secular wisdom of
which it is written: " I will destroy the wisdom of the wise."

A long intervening period followed, during which eccle siastical
opinion, with many fluctuations of a downward tendency, was still
publicly controlled by the Canons of the Synod of Orange. That much was
done in defence of the doctrines of grace by the writers • whom I have
already mentioned as opposed to Semi-Pelagianism, and tending
effectually to counteract the efforts of Cassian, Faustus, Vincentius
Lorinensis, and the like, and to discredit the Semi-Pelagian views,
cannot be questioned. But it is too evident that pure Augustinianism was
by no means accepted in every quarter. We see this in the fate of
Godeschalc, and in other incidents of a like nature.

We come next to Bernard, who strenuously asserted Augustin's views, and
\\vho in virtue of doing so became one of the most powerful characters
that shed an ennobling influence on the mediaeval Church. Bernard's
treatise ox GRACE AND FREE-WILL is singularly fresh and accurate, and
his age, as Neander has well pointed out, was a new spring time of
spiritual life after a long winter. At the beginning of the twelfth
century a new creative epoch entered, and a new outpouring of the Holy
Ghost, when religion, though still mingled with foreign elements,
decidedly revived among the nations. Bernard was the representative of
that mystic or pectoral theology which runs through the mediaeval period
wherever it shows spiritual elements. The stream of religious thought
may be said to have divided in two from his time, the one more
scholastic, the other more mystic. The defini-

u

tions and distinctions supplied by Bernard are often of the happiest.
Thus he says: " Simply to will comes from man's nature; to will wickedly
comes from corrupt nature; to will well, from supernatural grace."
Another passage from his treatise on grace and free-will is as follows:
" You say, What, then, is it that free-will does ? I answer briefly, It
is made •ichole (salvatur). Take away free-will, and there will be
nothing to be healed. Take away grace, and there will be no healing
influence (non erit unde salvetur). This work cannot be effected without
the two—the one the cause by which it is accomplished, the other the
subject on which, or in which, it is accomplished. God is the author of
salvation •' free-will is only capable of receiving it (tantum capax)."

The transition - stage between Bernard and the epoch of the Reformation
was the period of mediaeval mysticism. This mystic theology, influenced
as it was by vivid views of the Holy Spirit, may be said to have moved
on a twofold hinge— on the sense of sin, blindness, inability, and
defilement on the one hand; and on the great deliverance from all parts
of moral and spiritual ruin, which is hourly to be found from Christ's
Spirit, on the other. Introverting its regards, this school of theology
occupied itself with the personal Redeemer, and with the restoration of
light, life, and holiness by the Holy Spirit. The centre round which
tin's whole theology moved was fellowship of life with the Redeemer
through the Holy Ghost; and it was destined to scatter the seed, and
prepare the way for the clearer views of the Reformation epoch. It may
be said that the mystic element, though insufficient of itself to give
rise to a general reformation, stands connected with almost every true
revival or great religious movement that has ever taken place. In some
cases, it goes before as an indispensable preliminary. In others, it
comes in as a tribu tary stream, or as a necessary complement when a
movement threatens to decay. The labours of the older mystics— Eckart,
Tauler, a Kempis, Wessel, and the author of the

Theologia Germanica —stood in a definite relation to the full
development of Christian doctrine at the Eeformation. The felt distance
from God, the deep solitude of their hearts, their desires for the
present enjoyment of God as their proper element—these and similar
feelings awakened by the Holy Spirit were uttered by these writers in
mystic language, and from a mystic point of view; but they served to
some con siderable extent to rescue a large class from the terrible
infliction of ecclesiastical form or a mere dead orthodoxy. But the
mystic element which limits its regards to CHRIST IN us, and which fails
to give prominence to Christ's merits FOR us, never of itself produced a
widespread renovation of spiritual life. It was ignorant of the liberty
derived from imputed righteousness—that is, was ignorant of the true
ground and indispensable condition of the communication of the Spirit,
and of all filial communion with God. And it bears, when it stands
alone, the elements of decay and dete rioration in itself. But the great
witnesses of free grace and of Christ's merits and atonement, whether we
think of one period or another,—such as Luther, Whitefield, Venn, and
others,—were all moulded in their first stage by these views.

THE PERIOD OF THE REFORMATION.

The period of THE EEFORMATION, to which we now come, gave a testimony to
the Holy Spirit more full and explicit than had ever been uttered since
the apostolic age. 1 Considered in its origin, the Eeformation was
itself a great work of the Spirit of God, and the men who bore a leading
part in it were fully conscious of this fact. The Semi-Pelagianism and
the Pelagianism in its worst form, which had insinuated itself into the
theology of mediaeval times,

1 See Luthardt, die Lehre vom Freien Willen, Leipz. 1863; Dieckhoffs
Luther's Lehre von der Gnade Theol. Zeltsch. 1860 ; Frank, die Thcoloyie
der F. Concordice; Kostlin's Luther's Theoloyte, 1863.

were denounced in the most unsparing terms. The Augus-tinian views were
proclaimed with full emphasis and with resuscitated vigour. But these
doctrines, from the altered circumstances, received a new application
and a new direction in several respects. The term GRACE, for instance,
which in Augustin's acceptation intimated the inward exercise of love
awakened by the operations of the Holy Spirit (Rom. v. 5), and which in
the scholastic theology had come to denote a quality of the soul, or the
inward endowments, and infused habits of faith, love, and hope, was now
taken in the more scriptural and wider sense for the free, the
efficacious FAVOUR which is in the divine mind. Luther extended the
meaning according to the terms of Scripture ; and Melanchthon ex pressed
a regret that theologians had not rather used the term FAVOUR. The
Reformers having to use the term grace or free favour in connection with
justification through Christ's righteousness, began largely to use the
phrase: " the work of the Holy Spirit," instead of the term " grace."

The Reformers connected faith as the receptive organ or hand by which
men receive the imputed righteousness which justifies us in the closest
possible way with the operation of the Holy Spirit as its author or
producing cause. While they asserted the first point, that justification
before God proceeds only from faith, they asserted not less strongly the
second point, that faith in the heart proceeds only from God's Spirit.
And on all occasions they declared that if there be allowed in man any
natural power or natural capacity for believing without the operation of
the Holy Spirit, this inevitably overthrows at the second stage the very
doctrine of grace which had been laid as the foundation of all. To show
this, we need only advert to the way in which Luther expressed himself a
very few years after the Reformation began. The Reformer had frequently
declared that " in divine and spiritual things we have no free-will, but
only in name." He said: " That any one should be represented as just and
fearing God who has not

the Spirit, would be the same as if Belial were called Christ." And when
Erasmus was prevailed on to attempt a refutation of Luther, he assailed
him on a point which some accounted not a central one—the doctrine of
free-will, or the natural power of man. That was not Luther's opinion.
"I must own," said Luther, " that you alone in this contest have seized
your antagonist by the throat. I thank you for this with all my heart;
for I am better pleased to engage on that subject than on all those
secondary questions of the Pope, purgatory, and indulgences, with which
the enemies of the gospel have teazed me till now." Luther's treatise in
reply to Erasmus, bearing the title de servo arbitrio, undoubtedly one
of the most powerful treatises ever written on the subject of which it
treats, overthrows the open Pelagianism of Erasmus, who knew little of
theology, and the Semi-Pelagianism of men less extreme in their opinions
than Erasmus; and it proves to demonstration that the representation of
free-will which he impugns, overthrows Christ's work FOR us and the
Spirit's work IN us. Almost the only thing that one regrets about this
noble production is not its vehemence, which was the natural utterance
of the writer,—nor the strong statements about man being under the power
of Satan,—nor the representation of the will as resembling the
motionless inaction or immobility of a stock or stone, for these, though
lamented by some, will not appear extravagant exaggerations to one
enlightened as Luther was,—but the title of the book. Had the title been
de libero arbitrio et servo, indicating the natural indefeasible freedom
of the human being, arid yet the ground of evil in the will itself, both
sides of the momentous question would have been suitably recognised. For
there are times when the Church is compelled—as, for instance, in
antagonism to the stoical philosophy, to the Gnostic, Manichoean,
Pantheistic, and Deterrninist theories—to lay emphasis on the freedom of
the will, as well as on its bondage. These are the two sides, neither of
which can be unduly pressed without the other as its

necessary complement. Hence in Augustin's time the twofold question
bringing the t\\vo sides of truth to light, and running in direct
antagonism to two prevailing errors, was always put as follows : "
Without free-will, how shall God judge the world ? "Without grace, how
shall God save the world ?" These are the two sides of truth, neither of
which can ever be long left in abeyance ; and the Church, through the
whole tenor of her history, has ever been compelled to exhibit both,
sometimes in the same age enforcing the one against Fatalism, and the
other against an arrogant Semi-Pelagianism. It was against the latter
that the Reformers had more especially to testify.

After the allusion to Luther's treatise " on the bondage of the will,"
it is not necessary to put together at any length a collection of
Luther's sayings on this topic. A few sentences •will suffice as a
specimen. Thus he says: " We have need of the Spirit of Christ, without
whom all our works are only worthy of condemnation" (damnabilia). And
again: " I reject and condemn as erroneous every doctrine which extols
our free-will, and fights against the assistance and grace of our
Saviour Jesus Christ; because without Christ death and sin rule over us,
and the devil is the god and prince of the unconverted world." The noble
words of the Reformer toward the close of his treatise de servo arlitrio
are as follows : " I confess for myself, that even if it were possible /
would not have free-will committed to me, or anything whatever left in
my hand whereby I might endeavour after salvation; not merely because I
could not, amid so many adversaries and dangers, and, moreover, opposing
devils, withstand and retain it—since one devil is more powerful than
all men, and no one would be saved; but because, even though there were
no hazards, no adversaries, no devils, I should be constrained
perpetually to labour in uncertainty, and to beat the air." Calvin is in
full harmony with Luther, and constantly appeals to Augustin's views;
and it is not necessary to do more than refer to his Institutes.

We shall now refer succinctly to the doctrinal views of the Protestant
Churches, Lutheran and Reformed. Never since the days of the apostles
had anything been defined or preached in reference to the operations of
the Holy Spirit more full, accurate, and ample than was set forth in all
the Pro testant Churches under the blaze of light which shone all
around. The Lutheran theologian Hunnius thus expressed himself: " It is
most firmly believed in our Churches that in divine and spiritual things
we have no free-will, but only in name ;" and adds, " Not a particle of
what Erasmus contends for now remains to man, and where any such ability
for what is good is to be met with, it is to Toe, ascribed entirely to
the Holy Spirit" (de Lib. Art.}.

Without going into the vast mass of theological writing which was
produced at the period of the Reformation on the Spirit's operations, it
will be easier, as well as more com pendious, to refer to the symbolic
books or confessions, and to the catechisms which the various Churches
have given forth as public documents, and which were designed to express
the Church's faith, and to serve as the rule of teaching for the young.
It appears that on the gracious operations of the Spirit, Zwingli,
Calvin, Beza, Zanchius, Martyr, Olivian, Ursinus, and others that might
be named, were in perfect harmony with the great writers of the Lutheran
Church. In a word, the sun of grace shone in the heavens, and the
operations of the Spirit of grace in that bright period of the Church's
purity and zeal were recognised with one consent on every side. As we
must study brevity, let it suffice to say that the harmony of the
Protestant Confessions exhibits the Church - consciousness more fully
than can be found in the individual authorship of the Churches. Not only
so: confessional documents em bodying the convictions of collective
bodies have a signifi cance that cannot attach to individual writers,
however eminent. A few extracts here will suffice.

THE AUGSBURG CONFESSION, the Lutheran symbol, says (Article xviii.): "
Concerning free-will it is taught that to some extent man has freedom of
will to lead a just and honourable life, to choose between things which
reason com prehends ; but without grace, assistance, and the operation
of the Holy Spirit, he is unable to become pleasing to God, or to fear
God in heart, or to believe in Him, or to cast out of his heart the
innate evil propensity ; but these things arc effected through the, Holy
Spirit, which is given through the word of God."

THE CGNCORDIJE FORMUL.E, another Lutheran symbol, says on free-will in
the epitome: " It is rightly said, however, on the contrary, that in
conversion, God, through the draining of the, Holy Spirit, makes willing
men out of the obstinate, and un willing ; and that after such
conversion the regenerated will of man does not remain inactive in the
daily exercise of repent ance, but co-operates in all the works of the
Holy Spirit which He performs through us."

" Also that Doctor Luther has written that the will of man in his
conversion remains purely passive—that is, that it does nothing at all,
is to be understood rcspcctu divinec graticc in acccndcndis novis
rnotibus —that is, when THE SPIRIT OF GOD through the heard word, or
through the use of the holy sacraments, lays hold on the will of man and
effects the new birth and conversion. For, when the Holy Spirit has
effected and accomplished this, and through His divine power and
operation alone has changed and renewed the will of man, then the new
will of man is an instrument and organ of God the Holy Spirit, so that
it not only accepts the grace, but also co-operates in subsequent works
of the Holy Spirit.

" Consequently, that before the conversion of man there are but two
efficient causes found, namely, THE HOLY SPIRIT, and THE WORD OF GOD as
the instrument of the Holy Spirit, through which He effects conversion,
and which man is to hear; he cannot, however, give credence to it and
accept it

through his own powers, but exclusively through the grace and operation
of God the Holy Spirit."

We pass to THE EEFORMED CHURCH, and shall begin with THE HELVETIC
CONFESSION, the most widely accepted of the Reformed Confessions. This
Confession distinguishes very happily, as the CoNCORDLE FORMULA also
does, and as the WESTMINSTER CONFESSION did afterwards, between man FREE
and upright before the fall, and man fallen, with no free-will to do
good after the fall. It is then added : " In regeneration the
understanding is enlightened ly the Holy Spirit to under stand both the
mysteries and the will of God, and the will itself is not only changed
ly the Spirit, but also furnished with powers both to will and to do
good spontaneously (Rom. viii. 5, 6)."

In THE SCOTTISH CONFESSION (Article xii.) we read: " We are so dead, so
blind, so perverse, that neither can we feel when we are pricked, see
the light when it shines, nor assent to the will of God when it is
revealed, except the Spirit of the Lord Jesus quicken that which is
dead, remove the darkness from our minds, and bow our stubborn wills to
the obedience of the blessed gospel."

In THE FRENCH CONFESSION the words are: " We believe that \~by the
secret grace of the Holy Spirit we are made par takers of the light of
faith, which is the gracious gift of God, and peculiar to those alone to
whom God sees meet to impart it."

In THE CONFESSION OF BASIL we read: " Our nature is so vitiated, and has
such a propensity to sin, that unless it is renewed ly the Holy Spirit,
no man can do or will what is good of himself."

In all the Catechisms of the Protestant Church, in Calvin's Catechism,
in the Heidelberg Catechism, as well as Luther's, the testimony to the
doctrine of the Spirit is definite and ample.

We come next to a period of declension. After the

ecclesiastical confession to the doctrine of the Spirit in the clear
emphatic manner already mentioned, there followed a period of decline
and conflict, and this may be traced in all similar epochs in history.
Two phases of opinion, having much in common with each other, broke out
shortly after the Reformation—the synergistic error in the Lutheran
Church, and Arminianism in the Reformed Church. They ran counter to the
true doctrine of the Spirit and the homage which is due to the Holy
Spirit. They insinuated themselves into both Churches by conceding to
the free-will or natural power of man more than the Reformers had
acknowledged. They were opinions which led to disastrous consequences in
both the Churches, and broke the force of the Reformation.

The synergism which broke out through the influence of Melanchthon in
the Lutheran Church had everything in common with the synergistic views
of the Greek Church as represented by all her great writers—Basil, the
Gregories, Chrysostom, and others. Arminianism, again, in the Reformed
Church, was simply a revival of Serni-Pelagianism.

To begin with Synergism. The rise of this controversy, which came to be
agitated shortly after Luther's death, was due to the fact that
Melanchthon changed his opinion on the subject of free-will and the
natural power of man. He had held, with Luther, man's natural inability,
and in the first edition of his Common-places went farther in the way of
denying all liberty than can be vindicated. He began to waver and
vacillate after Erasmus published his polemical treatises against
Luther, and by an enlarged study of the Greek Fathers, to whom he was
already approximating on the subject of free-will. The change discovered
itself in germ in the second edition of his Loci Communes (A.D. 1535),
when he began to speak of three causes in conversion—the word of God,
the Holy Spirit, and the human will (non sane otiosa). He next spoke of
the human will assenting to the word of God. Then, two years after
Luther's death, he describes free-

will as the faculty in man of applying himself to divine grace
(1548)—that is, the ability of applying himself to divine grace in some
way. He began to view the human will not so much as the thing to be
changed, but as a factor or con curring cause in conversion, though he
only once uses the term " co-operation."

When this lamentable controversy began in 1555, the followers of
Melanchthon took up the position that man is not merely passive in
conversion, but a co-operating cause. Strigel of Jena threw himself with
all his energy into the controversy, and openly declared himself in a
synergistic sense. Not to mention others, Flacius, the admirer of
Luther, and one of the richest as well as most erudite minds that
adorned that age, became a vehement assailant of the synergistic
opinions. The controversy, as is often the case, seemed some times to
turn on a razor's edge, and yet truth was on one side and error on the
other. Strigel, though he continued to de clare that a man could not
convert himself without the Holy Spirit, advanced, without doubt, to
Semi-Pelagian views when he maintained the human self-determination in
the matter of conversion. Flacius, again, starts with the assertion of
man's total incapacity for good, and that the divine operation of the
Holy Spirit alone gives rise to true conversion. But he committed
himself to positions on original sin which were so extreme that they
outraged the theological mind both of the Lutheran and Keformed Church.
He went so far as to affirm that sin had become the very substance of
man —an extravagance which repelled every mind, and involved the fearful
conse quence that on such a theory man could not be a subject of
redemption.

The two parties in this controversy largely destroyed each other's
arguments, and needed the intervention of a third party to mediate
between them and readjust the balance of truth. And this was the very
issue that the course of events brought about. Strigel contended that
the Spirit's action

corresponds to the peculiar nature of the will, but not so as to destroy
the will. lie held that the Spirit's action on man as a free agent was
different from the way in which power is exercised on mere inanimate and
unconscious objects, as a stock or stone, and that co-action could not
be applied to the will (voluntas non potest cogi). No one will hesitate
to say that so far he was right. But the questionable part of his
argument begins to appear when he insists on a natural aptitude or power
in the will of man for good. He would not allow that the natural man was
but passive in the act of conversion. He held that man is not so much
dead as sick ; and he contended that the power for good is not so much
lost as enfeebled, bound, or fettered by sin, so that it can do nothing
without the Holy Ghost; but that when freed it co operates to
conversion, though in a languid way. He held that the human will cannot
without the Spirit begin its con version, but that it is not a resisting
or merely passive element. The affinity of this view, or rather its
perfect identity with Semi-Pelagianism, cannot be doubtful. He seems to
have known nothing in his own experience of a sudden conversion by
divine grace; and he speaks as if it could not be without the
concurrence of a divine and human cause.

Flacius, on his side of the argument, demands whence arises the will to
good, the very inclination to conversion, and the prayer for it ? Does
this come from God alone, or partly from the synergism of man ? He adds,
" I demand whether you say that the will co-operates before the gift of
faith or after the reception of faith ?"

The Formula Concordke, prepared by Brentius, Andrea, and others, came in
to put this matter on its right ground, and to correct extremes, when
the Lutheran Church was in volved in the most critical danger. It
repudiated, on the one side, the error that from the human will could
come the first beginnings of conversion or anything truly good till
grace first apprehends it and replenishes it with new powers; and on

the other side the revolting dogma of Flacius, that original sin had
become the essence of man. Its admirably-balanced statements bring out
that conversion has its efficient cause only in the operation of the
Holy Ghost, and that man neither effects it nor co-operates in it. It is
stated that the Holy Spirit acts on the will of man, the subject of the
change,—that the operation is ON the will and IN the will by means of
the word. It repudiates the active synergism of Strigel and the
continuous resistance of Flacius, who contended that before and after
conversion the human will does nothing but resist. It sets forth that
after conversion, but only after conversion, the mind with new powers
begins actively to co-operate.

THE UNITARIAN MOVEMENT, begun by Socinius and carried on by the Polish
Brethren (Fratres Poloni], developed a bold attack on the Holy Spirit,
both in regard to His personality and His work. As, however, it was only
another phase of Naturalism or Deism, as well as directly
anti-Trinitarian, it could not secure a footing within the Church, and
was at once expelled.

But the ARMINIAN MOVEMENT, identical in all respects with
Semi-Pelagianism, insinuated itself into the Reformed Churches, and
became a very formidable power, which spread in all directions, and can
scarcely even yet be said to have spent its force. The founder of it was
Arminius, born in 1560, a man of distinguished gifts, who, by the aid of
bene volent friends, had been helped forward in his studies till he was
sent to prosecute his theological curriculum under Beza in 1582.
Everything in his history subsequent to this—his visit to Italy, his
acquaintance with Bellarmine, the suspicious awakened by his utterances
after being promoted to the pas torate in Amsterdam (A.D. 1588), and the
doubts entertained as to his opinions when called to be Junius'
successor in the chair of Theology at Leyden, though he declared that he
held with Augustin, and repudiated the Pelagian tenets—creates a doubt
whether the doctrines of grace were ever fully accepted

by him. About a year after entering upon his theological duties at
Leyden, opinions were propounded by him at variance with the doctrine of
the Reformed Church (1604). Then began the controversy which convulsed
the Dutch Church.

"Without entering into all Arminius' opinions, let me briefly notice
those which referred to the Holy Spirit. He maintained that the Spirit's
operation was in every case resistible, and that there was no invincible
efficacy put forth on any to whom the gospel is preached. The assent of
the will was said to decide the matter. It was held that every one could
obey or resist; that the cause of conversion was not the Holy Spirit so
much as the human will concurring or co-operating ; and that this was
the immediate cause of con version. Let me briefly notice the points
which came up in these discussions.

As to the subjects of conversion, it was a question whether the Holy
Spirit exercised the same gracious operation on every hearer to whom the
gospel is first proclaimed. This was affirmed by the Arminians. Not only
so : they condemned it as an unwarrantable limitation of the grace of
God to hold that the Huly Spirit effectually u'ork-s faith in any by
removing the resistance of the mind, and by imparting the power to
believe-In a word, while nominally allowing the action of the Spirit, it
came to this: that it was an inefficacious and resistible influence,
little more—if, indeed, it was anything more— than external suasion.

They placed themselves on the same footing with the Semi-Pelagians as to
everything bearing on the universality of the Spirit's grace, as to the
equality which must be allowed to all men, and as to the sufficiency of
grace for all alike. They took the decision of the matter out of God's
free-will, which they challenged, and put it into man's free-will, which
they maintained. The question was formally raised: Were all converted
that the Spirit intended to convert by the gospel ?

and at the Hague Conference, the Arminians, without scruple or reserve,
laid down the position that the Holy Spirit, when He operates on man
with the intention of converting him, can be resisted (Coll. Hag. p.
227). Sufficient grace was strongly asserted ; by which phrase they
intimated that assistance was given only in such a way and measure that
at his own dis cretion a man could take the decisive step, and that the
will can help itself to the act of faith. But they denied that the
Spirit conferred the gift of faith. That the Holy Spirit im parts the
renewing of the will, or introduces a new quality into the will,
rendering it certain that faith shall ensue, they denied. They allowed
only assistance, but denied that the will is inclined by the Spirit of
God. They insisted that the Holy Spirit never operates on the will of
men except in such a way as could be resisted. And they openly denied
that faith could be called the gift of God, as wrought by the Spirit of
God.

These Arminian tenets run counter to all the invincible energy which
makes faith the gift of the Spirit of God. They throw man back on
himself, and make all dependent on the human will in the application of
redemption, forgetting that man has AS LITTLE POWER as MERIT. On the
contrary, the Confessions all testified according to Scripture that the
will— in other words, that the carnal mind—is enmity against God, and
that the Spirit's operations are effectual. These are not so languid as
to stop short of taking away the stony heart.

After many years' discussion on these points, in which the true life of
the Church consists, the Synod of Dort was assembled [13th Nov. 1618 to
9th May 1619] to give an ecclesiastical decision on them.
Representatives were in vited from all the Reformed Churches, and these
deputies eagerly came to that great Council, except where the Govern
ments, from jealousy, refused permission to attend, which was the case
with France. All the topics were discussed with fairness, erudition, and
zeal for truth. This great Synod,

equal in importance to any of the Ecumenical Councils, is the glory of
the Reformed Church. Since the first FOUR GENERAL COUNCILS, none have
ever assembled with a more momentous charge or commission. It gave forth
in its decrees a full and all - sided outline of the doctrines of
special grace; and nobly was its work discharged. The decrees of the
Synod were not only made the fundamental articles of the Dutch Church,
but continue, as part of the literature of these questions, to have a
significance for all time. And it may be questioned whether anything
more valuable as an ecclesiastical testimony for the doctrines of
sovereign, special, efficacious grace was ever prepared on this
important theme since the days of the apostles. Its great point was to
show that THE SPIRIT PRODUCES ALL, AND MAN ACTS ALL.

Nowhere has the renewing work of the Holy Spirit been more correctly and
fully exhibited than in the Canons of THE SYNOD OF DORT, from which I
shall quote only the following articles in the division containing the
third and fourth Heads of Doctrine:—

" Article VIII.—As many as are called by the gospel are uufeignedly
(scrio) called: for God hath most earnestly and truly declared in His
word what will be acceptable to Him— namely, that all who are called
should comply with the invitation. He, moreover, seriously promises
eternal life and rest to as many as shall come to Him, and believe on
Him.

" Article IX.—It is not the fault of the gospel, nor of Christ offered
therein, nor of God, who calls men by the gospel, and confers upon them
various gifts, that those who are called by the ministry of the word
refuse to come and be converted. The fault lies in themselves: some of
whom when called, regardless of their danger (sccuri), reject the word
of life; others, though they receive it (admittunf), suffer it not to
make a lasting impression on their heart (immittunt), therefore their
joy, arising only from a temporary faith, soon vanishes, and they fall
away; while others choke the seed of

the word by perplexing cares and the pleasures of this world, and
produce no fruit. This our Saviour teaches in the parable of the sower,
Matt. xiii.

" Article X.—But that others who are called by the gospel obey the call
and are converted, is not to be ascribed to the proper exercise of
free-will, whereby one distinguishes himself above others equally
furnished with grace sufficient for faith and conversion, as the proud
heresy of Pelagius maintains; but it must be wholly to God, who, as He
hath chosen His own from eternity in Christ, so He confers upon them
faith and repentance, rescues them from the power of darkness, and
translates them into the kingdom of His own Son, that they may show
forth the praises of Him who hath called them out of darkness into His
marvellous light; and may glory, not in themselves, but in the Lord,
according to the testimony of the apostles in various places.

" Article XL—But when God accomplishes His good plea sure, or works in
them true conversion, He not only causes the gospel to be externally
preached to them, and powerfully illuminates their minds by His Holy
Spirit that they may rightly understand and discern the things of the
Spirit of God ; but by the efficacy of the same regenerating Spirit He
pervades the inmost recesses of the man; He opens the closed and softens
the hardened heart, and circumcises that which was uncircumcised;
infuses new qualities into the will which, though heretofore dead, He
quickens; from being evil, dis obedient, and refractory, He renders it
good, obedient, and pliable; actuates and strengthens it, that, like a
good tree, it may bring forth the fruits of good actions.

" Article XII.—And this is the regeneration so highly celebrated in
Scripture and denominated a new creation, a resurrection from the dead,
a making alive, which God works in us without our aid. But this is
nowise effected merely by the external preaching of the gospel, by moral
suasion, or such a mode of operation that after God has performed His

x

part, it still remains in the power of man to be regenerated or not, to
be converted or to continue unconverted; but it is evidently A
SUPERNATURAL WORK, most powerful and at the same time most delightful,
astonishing, mysterious, and ineffable; not inferior in efficacy to
creation or the resur rection from the dead, as the Scripture, inspired
by the author of this work, declares; so that all in whose hearts God
works in this marvellous manner are, certainly, infallibly, and
effectually regenerated, and do actually believe. Whereupon the will
thus renewed is not only actuated and influenced by God, but in
consequence of this influence becomes itself active. Wherefore, also,
man is himself rightly said to believe and repent, by virtue of that
grace received.

• Article XIII.— THE MANNER OF THIS OPERATION cannot be fully
comprehended by believers in this life. Notwithstand ing which, they
rest satisfied with knowing and experiencing that by this grace of God
they are enabled to believe with the heart, and to love their Saviour.

" Article XIV.—Faith is therefore to be considered as the gift of God,
not on account of its being offered by God to man, to be accepted or
rejected at his pleasure, but because it is in reality conferred,
breathed, and infused into him; not even because God bestows the power
or ability to believe, and then expects that man should by the exercise
of his own free - will consent to the terms of salvation, and actually
believe in Christ; but because He who works in man both to will and to
do, and indeed all things in all, PRODUCES BOTH

THE WILL TO BELIEVE AND THE ACT OF BELIEVING also (ct Vellc credere et
ipsum credere)."

Before leaving these erratic theories, let me briefly advert to
Amyraldism, sometimes called hypothetic Universalism, which was in the
last degree disastrous to French Pro testantism before the revocation of
the Edict of Nantes. I refer to it more especially because the
phraseology which it introduced is still current in America, and is
found in this

country in quarters where we are surprised to find it. By those who were
competent to take the measure of Aniy-raldism,—such as Eivetus,
Maresius, and Spanheim,—it was regarded as a subtle form of Arminianism,
though its author and his followers declared their harmony with the
Articles of the Synod of Dort. After a long discussion of this middle
way by one synod after another, in 1637 and 1645, Amy-raldus, by his
protestations to the effect that he assented and consented to the
Articles of Dort, succeeded in dis arming further opposition, and in
obtaining an acquittal from the charge of heterodoxy in 1649. But it was
the death - blow of French Protestantism. The majority of the
theologians and pastors soon adopted his opinions. The French Protestant
Church virtually ceased to be a witness for the doctrines of grace. A
scholar of Amyraldus, Pajon, went farther than his master in minimizing
the extent of natural corruption and the power of the Spirit in
conversion. For the gracious operations of the Spirit, he, in fact, sub
stituted the moral influence of the word, or moral suasion. After this,
it was rather the Jansenists than the Protestants in France that gave
any testimony to the doctrines of special grace.

A few years later a terrible storm of persecution broke out, and
scattered the French Protestants over the globe. It is not for us to
call this a divine retribution, or a visitation in wrath. But few will
deny that a deep declension had begun, or hesitate to affirm that the
salt was beginning to lose its savour. Of those refugees who were
scattered in all direc tions, no fewer than TWO HUNDRED PASTORS repaired
to Holland, and were received with deep sympathy, and yet with clue
caution. They were not to be received as pastors into the Walloon
Church, unless they subscribed an article bind ing them to accept the
Articles of Dort, and never to refer in public or in private to those
Amyraldist and Pajonian doctrines which Spanheim, Jurieu, Saurin, and
others re-

garded ns an Arminian leaven \\vliich had destroyed the French
Protestant Church. These pastors consented to subscribe that article,
and the Church was thus freed from the evil leaven by which it was
menaced.

As to the distinction Amyraldus drew between NATURAL AND MORAL ABILITY,
still repeated both here and in America, and to which men so
distinguished as Edwards, Bellamy, and Fuller gave a too ready ear, let
me quote the following pointed and valuable remarks of Leidekker. " The
learned Amyraldus," says Leidekker, " did no service to the cause of the
Reformation by his distinction between A PHYSICAL AND MORAL POWER OF
BELIEVING IN CHRIST. He supposed the sinner to have the former, but not
the latter. He held that Christ died for all men according to a decree
of God, by which salvation was secured to sinners on condition of faith;
which general decree, according to him, was to be considered as going 1
Before the particular decree about giving faith to the elect. When it
was mentioned to him that his notion of the general decree now mentioned
was absurd, as it suspended the end of Christ's death on an impossible
condition, he denied that the condition was impossible. ' For,' said he,
' though I do not, with the Armenians, deny the indolence of fallen man,
or his inability to believe (I allow him to be morally impotent}, yd I
hold that man has still a physical or natural power of believing, as he
jwsscsses the natural faculties of the understand ing and the v'ilV.

" Herein Amyraldus has given a sad example of the abuse of great parts.
Shall we suppose that when Christ under took for sinners in the covenant
of grace, He considered them any otherwise than as most miserable, lost,
dead in sin, utterly impotent (Rom. v. 7, viii. 3); or that the wisdom
of God gave Christ to die for this end, that sinners might attain
salvation by a natural power of believing—a power which Amyraldus
confesses could never be exerted ? Further,

is not faith a most holy and moral act, and, as it takes place in the
sinner, purely supernatural act ? And shall we allow that a principle
which is not moral, but merely physical, can be productive of such a
moral and supernatural act ? Ought not an act and its principle to
correspond with one another ? Let the same thing be said of love which
Amyraldus has said of faith, and the Pelagians will triumph, who used to
speak so much about a natural faculty of loving God above all things.
Indeed, upon this scheme there will be no keeping out of the Pelagian
opinion about the powers of pure nature, and about physical or natural
faculties in man of doing what is morally good. For, in confuting that
opinion, our divines still maintained that the image of God was
requisite in the first man, in order to his exerting such morally good
acts as those of loving and seeking true blessedness in the enjoyment of
Him. But Amyraldus overthrows this doctrine, while he is led, by the
distinction he makes between natural and moral power, to hold that the
conception of man's rational nature necessarily includes in it a power
of exerting acts morally good, such as those of desiring and
endeavouring to obtain the restoration of communion with the infinitely
holy and blessed God. The tendency of this scheme became more manifest
when Pajonius—a disciple of Amyraldus—began to deny the necessity of the
Spirit's work in the internal illumina tion of sinners, in order to
their saving conversion. For, said Pajonius, nothing more is necessary
to that end than that the understanding which has in itself a
sufficiency of clear ideas (according to the language of the Cartesian
philosophy then in vogue) should only be struck by the light of external
revela tion, as the eye is struck by the rays of light coming from a
luminous object." ]

Church history, in one aspect of it, may be compared to a

1 Leydecker, de Veritate Religionis Reformats et Evangdicce, lib. ii.
cap. 6, sect. 82. This translation, though somewhat free, is happy and
spirited: it is given in Dr. John Anderson's Precious Truth, Pittsburg
1806.

326 THE DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

succession of advancing and receding tides. We may accord ingly regard
those three erratic tendencies last mentioned as

o \*/ o

the ebb-tide, after the flow of the Reformation period. Ere long,
however, there appeared again clear indications of an advancing tide of
spiritual influences, accompanied, as was to be anticipated, with a new
testimony to the personality and operations of the Holy Spirit. To these
we shall briefly advert.

I shall notice first in order THE PURITAN PERIOD, which, to a large
extent, may be described as taking form doctrinally in antagonism to the
Arminian teaching and to the Romish practices introduced and encouraged
in the English Church by the influence of Archbishop Laud. The testimony
to the doctrines of grace, on the part of the Puritans, was accom panied
with a signal effusion of the Holy Spirit. For the manner in which they
brought out the doctrine of the Spirit's operations as contrasted with
the Arminian teaching, which either did not recognise His agency, or
confined it to the incipient impulse given at the time of baptism, they
deserve the profound gratitude of subsequent ages. Whether we con verse
on this point with HOWE, whose platonic mind, under the clear doctrine
which he held and taught on the subject of the Spirit, soared to the
contemplation of the beatific vision ; or with OWEN, whose study of the
doctrine of the Spirit prompted him to unfold the spiritual mind and the
glory of Christ; or with T. GOODWIN, whose researches into the Spirit's
operations filled him with an enraptured love of knowledge, and a
singular appreciation of the least particle of that word which embodies
the Spirit's revelation,—we find nothing in their spirituality false or
unhealthy. Their doctrine of the Spirit was used to lead men to Christ,
not to withdraw men's minds from Him.

These great divines, following in the same path with their predecessors
Perkins, Preston, Bolton, and others, made it their task to prove that
the Spirit's work is so essential in every system of theology and of
ecclesiastical life, that without

it all falls under the law of a perilous extemalism; that the
regeneration of the nature is not less important than the justification
of the person; and that the Spirit's work is not to be represented as
merely coeval and identical with the rite of baptism. The latter point,
taking the Spirit's operations away from the mere observances of
Ritualism, was one service among many which Puritan theology rendered to
evangelical truth.

In this period the Christian consciousness and the Church consciousness
in reference to the Spirit's operations were most definite and clear. It
was a period also of great local awaken ings, when villages and towns
were simultaneously brought under deep religious impressions, and which
were always attended with a full belief of the Spirit's personality and
work. Marked revivals took place in Scotland under the earnest preaching
of Welsh, Bruce, Livingstone, Dickson, Rutherford, and Blair, sometimes
simultaneously, at other times more gradually. Similar effects in
England accom panied the preaching of Rogers, Blakerby, Baxter, and
others of that galaxy of remarkable men who lived and laboured to
advance the cause of true religion. And the result was- the introduction
of a new phase of theology in delineating the order of salvation— a
theology of regeneration cultivated and expanded as a topic l\>y itself.
The ample consideration of this theme by all the Puritans, such as
CHARNOCK, OWEN, HOWE, convey a clear proof that a new point of view had
been attained. What the previous theologians had developed was by no
means repudiated or undervalued, but only supple mented. The great
theologians both of the Lutheran and Reformed Church developed the order
of salvation as far as the Spirit operates, in order to justification.
Now we hear more of regeneration, illumination, and the renewing of the
Holy Ghost.

The first generation developed in due proportion Christ FOR us and
Christ IN us. And this was the school which of all others

gave the fullest and most emphatic description of the Spirit's work. Of
the Puritan theology it was the prominent peculiarity to bring out the
distinction between nature and grace, and to enforce the new birth
irrespective of the theory which identifies it with baptism. To one fact
all history gives a harmonious testimony. In the ratio in which the
ritualistic element ascends, the spiritual element descends ; the
elevation of the one being the depression of the other. And on the full
persuasion of this the Puritans acted through all their history.

But they had difficulties of another kind to encounter from the extreme
opinions, nay, wild extravagances, to which sects and parties pushed the
very doctrine of the Spirit for which they testified. It seemed as if an
enemy had done this to discredit and discountenance the great doctrine
to which they gave prominence. There seemed for a time a wild war of
errors contending for the mastery. There was not only the naturalism of
the Arminian system, but a congeries of other errors. The Quakers
abandoned the sacraments altogether, and well-nigh lost sight of the
objective Christ in an all-absorbing subjectivity.

To the various classes of these enthusiasts, and to their names, it is
not necessary more particularly to refer. Their great error was to
substitute the Spirit for the word, the mischievous results of which all
epochs attest. They set forth that though it was not absolutely useless
to peruse the Scriptures, the mere knowledge of the latter was wholly
unavailing, and could not promote the soul's salvation; that the man
must learn from the Lord Himself, and be immediately instructed by the
Spirit. The arrogance and presumption of such a claim was at once
apparent. Though these enthusiasts had little if any learning, and a
small and very inadequate acquaintance with any of the Christian
doctrines by instruction from others or personal study, they claimed to
be better informed than the greatest theologians who had spent their
life in the humble and prayerful study of Christian truth

with all the available aids of learning. It was alleged, how ever, that
these last were but letter-learned men, untaught by the Holy Spirit.
They proclaimed that the divine light, kindled in men by an immediate
operation of God's Spirit, taught them what was needed for salvation ;
that more or less of Bible knowledge was of small moment, and that man
had, by sin, entirely forfeited anything like a salutary use of reason.
They claimed spiritual illumination apart from the Scriptures; and they
both taught and acted on the principle that they were to act as the
Spirit moved them. There were Antinomian enthusiasts professing to be
mechanically acted on by the Spirit. Eutherford, who has fully described
them in his " Spiritual Antichrist," was a contemporary and a true
witness of what he read and saw.

It was to defend truth thus imperilled, and to correct ex travagant
opinions which repelled many arid drove them into antagonism to the
whole subject, that Owen prepared his masterly work on the Holy Spirit.
It has long been regarded, and justly, as the most important work on the
Spirit in any literature. Without undertaking an analysis of this great
work, let me simply quote what he says on the direct action of the
Spirit on the human mind. He says: " God works immediately by His Spirit
in and on the wills of His saints—that is, He puts forth a real
physical\* power that is not contained in these exhortations, though He
doth it by and with them." And again, in reference to God's applications
to the soul, they are, he says, " both really and physically efficient
and moral also; the one consisting in the efficacy of His Spirit, the
other lying in the exhortations of the word."

The Puritan movement, like other forms of spiritual life, sprung from a
historical necessity, and continued to exert its energies on the
foundation of the Reformation theology. And in their eager desire to
glorify their Lord, and to display the full doctrine of the Holy Spirit,
these men were scarcely

1 It is better to say, "analogous to what is physical" (analoga
physicse).

conscious of that original development that they were step Ly step
producing.

Were we to review critically the Puritan school of theology, which is
not the present object, we should be disposed to say that it scarcely
preserved through all its history, especially in the third generation,
the equipoise of truth for which it was at first distinguished. It must
be admitted, that while it never failed to give a full testimony to the
person and opera tions of the Holy Spirit, it sometimes forgot that the
great aim and scope of the Spirit, as the Spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus, is to glorify Christ;
that it occasionally gave greater emphasis to the work of the Spirit
within than to the work of Christ without; that it frequently gave more
prominence to faith as a grace of the Spirit than to faith as the
receptive action (actio receptiva) or uniting bond to Christ as the Lord
our righteousness. The most salutary development is where the one does
not eclipse the other.

The Puritanic age may be said to have reached its culmi nating point, in
a theological point of view, in producing those writings to which it
gave origin on the doctrine of the Holy Spirit, and which depict the
Christian as a new creature in Christ Jesus—a distinct existence, but
never separated from the living Head. The writings of Sibbs, Gurnall,
Howe, and Goodwin contain a happy delineation of the Spirit's work on
the individual as well as on the Church at large, though in proportion
they say less than was to have been expected on the personality and
mission of the Comforter. The English Nonconformists, the successors of
the Puritans, continued for a century and a half to be the great
bulwarks and defenders of the doctrine of the Spirit, and it will be an
evil day for England and for themselves if, under the spell of an undue
partiality for German thought, they should ever cease to regard this
doctrine of the Spirit, and the spiritual religion to which right views
of the Spirit can alone direct men's minds, as their badge of
distinction and their glory. The

work of HUKRION, though a posthumous publication and never completed,
may be described as a work of great value so far as it goes. The same
thing may be said of the work of Dr. Guyse on the Godhead of the Spirit.
They furnish two of the best specimens which our tongue possesses of the
way in which the elements of truth which the ancient Church developed
may be recast and blended or interwoven with the more evangelical views
of Protestant doctrine. The peculiar cast of Hurrion's work, replete
with references to the Greek Fathers, warrants us in saying that those
writers are greatly mistaken who are disposed to affirm, as Tholuck did,
1 that on the doctrine of the Spirit the contributions of the early
centuries are either barren of results or of little avail to the Church
of our time.

The great writers of the English Church subsequently to the Restoration
and the Eevolution, such as Taylor, Barrow, Tillotson, Sherlock, South,
have done less for this department of theology than for any other. The
personality and deity of the Spirit have nowhere found more able and
strenuous as well as erudite defenders. But on the Spirit's work they
were not themselves, except Pearson and Leighton. They were in part
repelled by the extravagances into which the Commonwealth sects fell.
But another cause is to be found in the Arminian theology, and in the
theory of baptismal regeneration to which they were wedded, and through
which they, for the most part, considered the subject.

How eminent divines, in the course of another generation, treated the
doctrine of the Spirit in the Church of England, appears from the work
of the well-known Bishop Warburton, entitled The Doctrine of Grace, or
the Office, and Operations of the Holy Spirit. The able writer, in fact,
does not treat of grace at all in any acceptation of the term. He has
not in his thoughts the operations of the Holy Spirit, which are com
monly called the grace by which men are converted or called

1 Anzeiger, 1848, p. 571.

to faith and holiness. With him there is no work of the Spirit in that
sense, though he says that he will point out the middle way between
unbelief and enthusiasm—between such as assert that no divine operation
is necessary to improve man's understanding and heart, and such as boast
of the personal experience of the supernatural operations of the Spirit.
One expects to find that this outline will have its application to
individuals in the present day, and is surprised to find that his words
refer only to the extraordinary opera tions of the Spirit in the age of
the apostles, and to the fact that these operations ceased with the
apostles. No believer in Revelation will dispute his statements so far
as he brings out in that connection the fact of the extraordinary
operations of the Spirit. The book, however, would have corresponded
with its title had he used the term GRACE as descriptive of the Spirit's
operations on every true Christian. But no one in any school of theology
has been in the habit of using the term GRACE with the special
acceptation to which he limits it. In a word, according to "Warburton,
the Spirit's office and operations were limited to the extraordinary
gifts and super natural guidance which those enjoyed who were made the
chosen vessels of inspiration. He lays down as his funda mental
position, that Christ's redemption could not otherwise be communicated
to men; that God sent His Spirit to enlighten their understandings and
sanctify their hearts; and that the wisdom of God appeared in the method
which He condescended to employ at Pentecost in the communication of the
Spirit of truth. The whole discussion is occupied with the great work of
the Spirit in the inspiration of the apostles. And anything further is
set down to a presumptuous and enthusiastic pretension on the part of
men who cannot justify their claim, and who are only deceivers or
deceived. Hence the unwarrantable violence of his denunciations of
Wesley. Any claim to have the Spirit, or to be guided by the Spirit, was
repudiated by Warburton as a claim to inspiration.

Before we take up the next great controversy on the doctrine of the
Spirit, it is proper to notice two currents of evangelical truth and
spiritual life, the result of a new out pouring of the Holy Spirit.
These were the important move ment in Germany under Spener and his
followers, and the great awakening which took place in this country and
America in connection with Whitefield, Wesley, and Edwards. A brief
allusion to these important epochs must suffice, as our object in this
sketch is rather to trace the history of the doctrine of the Spirit,
than to describe the reformations or revivals which His presence and
operations have produced in the Churches.

Spener, in Germany, imbibing the spirit of Arnd, though a Lutheran and
faithful to his Church, yet on friendly terms with many of the Reformed
ministers, and appreciating true piety wherever he found it, began a
movement in many re spects analogous to the Puritan movement, though
with com-plexional peculiarities which adapted it to his own land. His
aim was the revival of spiritual life in the Lutheran Church, stiffened
and ossified by forms; and an extraordinary blessing from on high, or a
fresh outpouring of the Spirit for at least two generations, crowned the
movement. In Spener's teach ing, in his lectures on Arnd's true
Christianity, in his sermons on regeneration, and, indeed, in all his
writings as well as in the Collegia pietatis which he formed, his great
aim was, while ardently testifying for all the doctrines of the
Eeformation, to fan the spiritual life by a constant reference to the
Holy Spirit. The previous theology represented by Melanchthon, Chemnitz,
Gerhard, and others, had spoken of the Spirit's work in the order of
salvation. Spener's constant reference to the Holy Spirit's operations
introduced into theology a new set of terms. The operations of the
Spirit came to be reduced under different heads, or classified in a new
way. And the theologians, who had spoken in a vague, general way on the
work of the Spirit in the order of salvation, were under the

necessity of explaining themselves in reference to the Holy Spirit as a
topic which now required to be treated indepen dently, and in reference
to Biblical terms such as calling, conversion, repentance, illumination,
regeneration, renewing, holiness, which could no longer be fused
together as having no distinct or separate significance, and as all
meaning one and the same thing. The union to Christ, effected by the
Spirit and the personal inhabitation of the Spirit, had to be treated in
a different way.

The movement begun by Spener subsided in the third generation. An
opposite current set in, and the spiritual decline was indicated by the
question which carne to be dis cussed, \\vhether any supernatural
influence was at work in conversion, or whether all was effected by the
moral power of the word. Schubert of Helmstadt resuscitated Pajonism,
which called forth the keen opposition of Bertling in 1753. A more
formidable work appeared from the pen of JUNCKHEIM in 1775, on the
supernatural in the operations of grace, which, from the reception it
met with, and especially from the commendation bestowed on it by such a
man as Ernesti, may be said to have given rise to a set of opinions from
which Germany has never recovered. He asserted that the operation of God
in men's regeneration and conversion was not to be designated
supernatural, or, if that style of language was still retained, only in
so far as the Scriptures were of supernatural origin. For the rest,
there was nothing that was not wholly natural. The moral power of the
word effected all. This was an erratic tendency which, though it called
forth less alarm than Pelagianism, or Synergism, or Arminianism, was as
perilous as any of them, and proved, perhaps, more calamitous. It was a
theory that recognised the Scriptures, but left the Spirit nothing
further to do. The propounder of this theory did not perceive that
without an inward supernatural work of grace, admitted and believed, men
will not long believe in an external supernatural revelation. More than
that: if the Spirit

does nothing on the individual, His personality will not long be
believed in any proper sense of the term. And both results necessarily
followed, in due course, in the religious history of Germany.

Junckheim's position was, that if the operations of grace in man's soul
were supernatural, conversion, faith, and holiness would be purely
MIRACULOUS WORKS, and the operations of God would be irresistible. He
accordingly adjusted his views to avoid these consequences, and held
that the preacher must inculcate on his hearers that there are no
immediate operations of the Spirit. He argued, with no small ingenuity
and force, that the operations of the Spirit and their effects are not
miraculous works, though some divines have called them so; and all that
is supernatural in these effects, said he, has one mark or criterion
which no enthusiast can turn to account. It consists in this, that they
are mediate, and produced by the divine word in a manner conformable to
our moral nature; whereas the enthusiast claims immediate revelations
based on feeling. He held that the operations of grace do not alter
man's nature, and that they take a natural course; that there are no
mysteries connected with them, and no influences of a supernatural power
which put the human machine in motion. And this he attempts to harmonize
with the Lutheran position that the man is passive in conversion.

In a word, the writer, apparently ignorant of the inward experience of
these gracious operations of which he ventured to treat, explains away
the Spirit's operations or denies them. He concludes that these effects
are not to be sought in a mode of operation on the heart, but in the
means, that is, in the word of God, of which the effect is far greater
than anything effected by reason or philosophy. But plainly he reduces
the word of God, acting merely in a moral way, to a philosophy.

Junckheim had nothing in common with those who affirm that the Holy
Spirit immediately operates on the mind as well as the word. And he took
up antagonistical ground to the

Spirit's immediate operations, because he perceived that this would
imply that these operations are irresistible. And he persuaded himself
that this could not be proved from Scripture.

Having established, to his own satisfaction, that the Spirit's mode of
operation is not supernatural, he next inquires, How does man resist
grace ? This is done, says he, when he sup presses good thoughts and
feelings, and neglects to make a right use of them. But he further asks,
Is not man, by a right use of them, a co-operating factor in conversion
? And he answers no: as little as a patient heals himself by following
the physician's prescription. The physician and the medicine healed him.
And when he comes to speak of religious feelings, he regards all these
feelings as something supernatural, in as far as they have their ground
in the word of God, but not in respect of their origin; for they do not,
according to him, flow from any immediate operation of the Holy Spirit,
but from a comparison of their heart and life with that which the Holy
Spirit, in His word, ascribes to the children of God. With regard to the
difference of nature and grace, to the exaggerated statement of which
Junckheim and others traced, as they thought, many evil consequences,
one is not a little startled with his conclusion. He says that this has
always been an apple of discord, and therefore he wishes the term GRACE
to be entirely omitted in dogmatic lectures, and not to remain in
sermons where the hearers are still less in a position to form definite
conceptions. No marvel that he wished the term abandoned, because he had
refined away or philosophized away the thing which it expressed. He does
not understand by it the supernatural operations of the Holy Spirit, by
which fallen men are enlightened, converted, and sanctified. But the
title of his own book, " On the Supernatural in the Operations of
Grace," is, from his own explanations, a very inept and unmeaning, if
not a deceptive, title.

After having explained away the true import of Scripture,

we are not surprised to find that he attempts to make the symbolic books
of the Lutheran Church speak in harmony with his views. Because these
symbolic books affirm that the Spirit operates in us only by the word,
he argues that this intimates that the operation is not immediate, not
irresistible, but moral only, and according to our moral nature.
According to Junckheim, prevenient grace amounts to this, that a man
cannot prevent the good ideas, thoughts, and sentiments made by the word
of God on the hearer or reader, just as it is impossible for us to open
our eyes and not see.

The refutation of all this speculation is easy enough on Biblical
ground. It is also contrary to the Church-conscious ness of the entire
Christian world from the beginning. If there was no more power or
influence than this put forth, the conclusion must be that man converts
himself, and that the Spirit has ceased to act since the age of
inspiration. No reason could exist which demanded the immediate presence
of the Holy Ghost as a divine Person. Still less could we imagine any
meaning or significance attaching to the exercise of prayer for the Holy
Spirit. If we accepted the doctrine laid down by Junckheim, and
commended by so many in Germany toward the close of last century, that
there is nothing to impress or influence the human mind but the moral
power exercised by the Scriptures, the inevitable consequence must be to
injure faith and to destroy all theology. The mystery of divine power
illuminating, renewing, sanctifying the human mind, is merged in a moral
influence or logico-moral power which the mere force of motives calls
forth from the mind itself. The spiritual union of the word and
Spirit—or of the word considered as " the sword of the Spirit"—ceases,
and only a moral power remains. The ruin of theology must also ensue. It
is too obvious to need any proof that, on this principle, all the great
articles of Christianity connected with the application of
redemption—calling, conversion, illumination, renewing, re generation,
and sanctification of the Spirit—must either be

Y

rejected or recast. The Church, believing in the Holy Ghost, into whom
every Christian is baptized, as well as into the Father and the Son, has
always maintained that there is an omnipotent power of the Spirit
exercised on every individual believer, as well as a mere logico-moral
influence exercised by the word.

This theory of Junckheim was the fatal blow from which, to this hour,
German Protestantism has never recovered. It lias in it almost every
unsalutary element that distinguished Pajonism in the Reformed French
Church. And to me it has always seemed that it produced the same
calamitous issues in the German Churches which Pajonism produced in the
French Protestant Church previous to the revocation of the Edict of
Xantes. It combined Pelagianism, Armiuianism, Amyraldism, and a sort of
Naturalism all in one.

It w r as well refuted by admirable men, but the current, of which it
was but the indication, was too strong and too wide for any refutation
to produce much effect. The excellent Lutheran theologian, Storr,
refuted the work on Biblical grounds in two valuable Latin discussions
on the efficacy of the Holy Spirit. 1 He had a comparatively easy task.
His exegesis of the Scripture passages bearing on the subject under
discussion was profound and conclusive, and no one can peruse them
without feeling that he has scattered to the w r inds the special
pleading of Junckheim in favour of a theory which is so far from being
based on Scripture that it can only be regarded as a foregone
conclusion. Tittmann did the same in his Opuscule? Wernsdorf, in his
Academic Disputations, most successfully asserted the true principles of
the Lutheran Church on the Spirit's work. And Eeinhard, in his System of
Christian Morals? maintained the efficacious operations of the Spirit in
the happiest manner and style. But it was too late.

1 C'ommentatio Thcoloyica de Spirltus Sancti in mcntibiis nostris
ejficientia, Tubings; 1788.

2 Tittmann, de opcre Spirit us Sancti salutari opusc. p. 420. 3
Keinhard, System der Christliclten Moral, iv. p. 251.

The theological revolution was effected: the receding tide since
Spener's day continued. Michaelis, Doderleiu, and, above all, Ernesti, 1
the great name in German exegesis, and the masterly writer on
hermeneutics, by his laudatory notice, gave Junckheim's work a passport
to acceptance in the universities of Germany and among the pastors.
German Protestantism had only one step to take further, viz.
Rationalism.

The next great fact connected with the doctrine of the Spirit, is THE
AWAKENING IN GREAT BRITAIN AND AMERICA in the middle of last century,
and the theological development resulting from it. It was undoubtedly
the greatest stream of divine life since the days of the Eeformation,
and imparted mainly to the English-speaking Churches. It was an
outpouring of the Spirit so powerful in its character and so fruitful of
con sequences, that we are warranted to say it has by no means spent its
force, and it deserves a passing remark, though we are mainly occupied
in tracing the history of the doctrine. The first movement goes back to
Boston and the Marrow men, the revivers of true doctrine. Edwards and
the Tennents in America, Whitefield and Wesley in England, Eobe,
M'Culloch, Maclaurin, and Gillies in the Established Church of Scotland,
Walker of Truro, Henry Venn, Berridge, Romaine, Newton, and Robinson in
the Church of England, with others outside these Churches who zealously
preached the same doctrines of grace, may be named as instruments with
whom this great movement was identified, and who were raised up to act a
part in it. In the second stage we find Rowland Hill, the Haldanes,
Simeon, and others at work in different ways. The progress of
Christianity, and of this great movement in parti cular, cannot be
viewed as the effect of natural development without any intervention
from above. None of the theories which shut out the action of the
Church's life-communicating Head can explain this great tide of
spiritual influence which 1 Neueste T/teologische B'Miothek, 1776.

put a new aspect on theology and Church life. The theory of natural
development, the theory of sacramental grace, not to mention the Romish
notion of a vicegerent, all fail to explain such a fresh and powerful
current of spiritual life; for they proceed on the principle that
Christianity has no present corresponding to its past in apostolic
times. They ignore the fact that the Holy Spirit acts with omnipotent
and omnipresent energy as the Comforter, Helper, or Advocate whom the
Lord promised at His departure, and who frequently descends with an
efficacy analogous to the Pentecostal out pouring from above to quicken
and inflame, to reanimate and restore, in a word, to make all things
new. The facts con nected with the founding of the Church at Pentecost
explode the theory of development so current in various forms in all
ritualistic and sacramental Churches. These awakenings also attest the
presence of the Spirit and the interposition of the Church's Head. They
come in seasonably to give a practical refutation of the theology of
development, though they are beyond our investigation. They are not in
our power: nor will they come forth when we attempt to conjure them ;
and we can only say, " It is the Lord " (John xxi. 7). While it is
Christ's Spirit who ushers in these creative epochs in Church history,
and while they indicate His hand who guides His Church onward to her
future, they are altogether free and sovereign. We can neither tell the
economy of them, nor explain why they pause. We come in only as gleaners
on the field of fact, but can neither tell the laws nor estimate the
momentum of that mighty and chainless force which breaks forth from the
kingdom of God and sweeps over a community. Such a power at that time
issued forth which could neither have been divined by human wisdom nor
brought about by human power, and spread over America, England, and Scot
land. At the time to which we have referred, there was a resuscitation
of a Church-consciousness on the subject of the Holy Spirit such as had
not been known from the days of the

Keformation. It was in a large degree a restoration also of Puritan
theology, though Wesleyanism attached itself to a type of theology which
was more allied to Lutheranism than to the articles of the Church of
England from which it sprung. But of that revival moment which gladdened
the English-speaking Churches of last century, we may say that it was
above all things Biblical; that it was not a mere revival of ancient
forms, measures, and engagements; that it was not, like Jansenism, a
mere resuscitation of Augustiniauism, valu able as that was, but a
return to the Bible, which gave it an elevation, energy, and success
which it could not otherwise have had.

The effect of this memorable outpouring of the Holy Spirit was very
perceptible on all the Churches. The Calvinistic Methodists, the
Wesleyan Methodists, and the Welsh Metho dists were the direct and
immediate fruit of it. Not less marked was the effect on the doctrine as
well as the ecclesias tical and missionary life of the Church of
England, though not diffused through the entire mass. The two Homilies
on the coming down of the Holy Ghost acquired a new signifi cance. The
prayers, replete as they are with allusions to the Spirit's work and
mission, were offered with new fervour. One author treated the subject
of the Spirit after another, free from the misty notions of sacramental
grace and the blighting Arminian views which may be traced in all the
previous period. The exposition of the subject by Henry Venn in his
Complete Duty of Man, by Robinson of Leicester in his Chris tian System,
1 by Eomaine in his remarkable discourse on the Holy Spirit, leave
nothing to be desired. For amplitude of statement and unembarrassed
freeness of doctrinal view, they show how great a change had taken
place. Courses of lectures on the Spirit were prepared and delivered.
Prayers were offered for the Holy Spirit. Haldane Stuart of Liverpool
sent out a yearly invitation to pray for the Spirit.

1 See Robinson's Christian System, vol. ii.

Of this revival the great theologian was President Edwards, whose
influence, as a thinker and leader of revival, has ever since been
powerfully felt. No man can dispute his claim to a place among the
acknowledged magnates of theology, whether we consider his profound
exposition of the high doctrines of sovereign grace, or his view of the
Religious Affections, in which he states his doctrine of the Spirit, or
his almost unparalleled logical power. Had the theological reading of
Edwards and his acquaintance with the productions of previous
theological schools been in any proportion to his spiritual experience
and mental powers, he would have taken his place along with Augustin,
Anselm, Calvin, and Owen as one of the greatest formers of thought for
all time. But from lack of acquaintance with the theological thought and
style of the previous ages of the Church, he does not always lay down
his premises or first principles with sufficient breadth and caution.
Thus he powerfully describes the supernatural light immediately imparted
to the soul by the Spirit of God as giving a sense of divine things in
their reality and superlative excellency. But it is too one-sided for a
high Calvinist, as Edwards undoubtedly was. His distinction between
NATURAL and MORAL ABILITY, in which he has been largely followed by
American and English writers, was a capital mistake. Had Edwards fully
known the place which that mischievous theory occupied in the Amyraldist
system, it would probably never have been propounded in the manner in
which it is set forth by him in his essay on the freedom of the will and
elsewhere. For all the practical ends for which he appeals to it, it is
safe enough ; when it is used speculatively, it is dangerous. It was
adopted in America by Bellamy, Dwight, Woods, and by the revivalists as
a body. It was accepted here by Dr. Erskine, by Fuller, Ryland, Hinton,
Dr. Pye Smith in England. Pro ceeding in that line of tilings, these
writers thought they had gained a vantage-ground. They argued that the
previous mode of representing the matter by the followers of Augustin

and Calvin, left the idea of a real incapacity or natural inability;
that it was chargeable with an improper application of Scripture figures
(Eph. ii. 1; Ezek. xxxvii.); that they gave a needless point of attack
to Pelagians; and 'that men might reasonably say that they were not
responsible for not per forming what was really not in his power. To
obviate this, the assertors of the above-named distinction said, The
proper language to be used was simply that men vjould not, not that they
could not, repent and believe the gospel. They wished to exhibit that
the entire turning-point was with the will, and they threw the
responsibility on the man to make him feel that he would not come and be
saved.

These expositions of inability, resolving the whole matter into an act
of will, served no good purpose or end. They were not in harmony with
Scripture nor with the doctrines of the Reformation, either in the
Lutheran or Reformed Church. They were an attempt in words at least to
do something, or at least seem to do something, to obviate the common
objec tion of the Semi-Pelagians: '' A man cannot be under an obligation
beyond his ability; he cannot be bound to do what is not within his own
power and resources." The answer to that objection, as given by Marckius
and by all the divines of the post-Reformation period, was, that while
God did not require of man in innocence anything for which he had not
ability, yet God did not lose His right to demand obedience though man
has forfeited his power or ability. This answer was held to be
sufficient; and it is recognised by all who have right views either of
the IMPETRATION or APPLICATION OF REDEMPTION. The writers to whom
Edwards incautiously gave this new impulse supposed that a better answer
could be given by drawing a distinction between natural and moral
ability. They set forth that men, even as they now are, have a natural
power to believe in Christ and to repent, but that they are denuded of
all moral power to do either. There is nothing more deceptive than the
use of such nomenclature, which

really amounts to nothing. It hides the true state of the question under
cloudy terms. To show how unmeaning that distinction is, let me notice
the following points:—(1) The inability, according to the express words
of Scripture, must be traced to the understanding as well as to the will
(1 Cor. ii. 14). To the natural man the things of the Spirit of God are
foolishness, because he cannot know them, and because he misrepresents
them. But to prove that no efforts of the natural man will avail to make
a change, and that only the supernatural light imparted by the Spirit
can suffice, the apostle says, " because they are spiritually
discerned." (2) The inability, viewed, according to the Pauline
statements, as enmity against God, as a non-subjection to the divine
law, and as an incapacity for being so subject (Eom. viii. 7), may be
called both natural and moral. That is, it is the loss of the image of
God, or of the original righteousness which at first belonged to Him and
was natural to Him. As man's entire nature is subject to this corruption
to such a degree that he cannot think a good thought or perform a single
good act without a change of nature, this inability may be called
natural and culpable. The act of the will is not the only hindrance.
There is the corruption of the nature and the want of supernatural
grace. If it lay all in a want of will or inclination, the frequently
repeated cannot of Scripture— e.y. cannot come, cannot please God,
cannot bear fruit, and the like—would have no other significance than
the disinclination of a man to do what he has within him full ability or
power to do, if we were only induced to will it. There can be no greater
misrepresentation or deception. (3) A common para logism is: " If a man
cannot in a true manner repent and believe, then he cannot do the
opposite, disbelieve and refuse salvation." But all unbelief and
impenitence have their root in natural depravity, and grow from it. The
inability to repent and believe presupposes a bias or tendency to the
opposite sin, and makes it natural and easy to practise it;

and they are left the more to shut their eyes and ears under a peculiar
induration permitted to descend on them.

All this serves to show how mistaken Edwards was in making that
distinction, which is still drawn by many of his followers, between
natural and moral ability. What was really aimed at was the conjunction
of two things, neither of which must be permitted to eclipse the other,
viz. free agency and inability, personal responsibility and the
necessary helps or aids of God's Spirit. And the true object is gained,
not by magnifying natural ability and shutting men up to will, but by
exhibiting the two sides of the incomprehensible mystery. They are both
true; and all that theology effects, is to conserve the mystery.

Again, we have to trace, as in previous epochs, THE RE CEDING TIDE OF
THE SPIRIT. Before the great leaders of that revival had passed away,
erratic views on the opera tions of the Spirit had begun to display
themselves, the usual concomitants of declension. The first of these was
Sandemaniauism, which we notice because its distinctive tenet—the
intellectual assent of faith—was accepted by a large section of
ministers in Scotland, and even by sijch a man as Dr. Erskine, and still
holds its place. About twenty-five years after the formation of the
Glasites in 1729, a dividing question was started by Sandeman on the
subject of saving faith, which, according to him, was nothing but the
faith of common life— ASSENT TO TESTIMONY. The letters on Theron and
Aspasio, which he published in 1757, embodied a new system of doctrine.
He allowed no work of the Spirit in the effectual application of
redemption. He says excellent things on the irnpetration or purchase of
redemption; but he repudiates all inward grace as counterfeit. Under the
guise of magnifying the former, he vilifies the latter, and all who
preached it, with the greatest contempt and scorn. He calls any allusion
to it self-righteousness and pride. One can easily see, what he himself
allows, that his mind had once been

troubled with convictions and contrition, and that he had solved the
matter in the wrong way. According to Sandernan, faith was a mere
passiveness in coming under impressions, a passive belief of the truth
without doing anything but appre hending the knowledge of what he often
calls the bare truth, or Christ's bare work, without any act, exercise,
or exertion of the mind whatsoever. And to leave no possible
misconception as to what he meant, he says, " The Spirit of God acts AS
the soul, sense, or meaning of the words wherein the gospel is
delivered" (p. 360). After stating that much has been said and written
in defence of supernatural grace, or the agency of the divine Spirit
influencing the hearts of men, in opposition to those reasoners who
doubt of or deny any such influence, and that many things have been said
on this head, serving to give us false notions of the divine grace and
Spirit, Sande-man subjoins, " The Holy Spirit is called the Spirit of
truth, as also the Spirit of grace. He speaks and breathes only the
grace and truth that came by Jesus Christ. When a man then comes to know
the gospel, or to receive the Spirit, he thinks of no other grace but
what appeared in Christ's tasting death for them ; no other truth but
what was manifest in Christ, the end of the law for righteousness. This
differs not a little from what the popular doctrine leads us to think
of, namely, tJic truth of grace in the heart. When our systems describe
faith to us as a saving grace bestowed on us, by which we make use of
Christ for salvation, are we not led to think of some grace necessary to
our salvation beside what appeared when Christ by the grace of God
tasted death for the sins of men ?"

It is clear that the writer identified the influence of the truth and
the influence of the Spirit, and that he intended to supersede every
other grace than the objective grace displayed in the atonement. Still
more unambiguously he says, " All the divine power which operates upon
the minds of men, either to frive the first relief to their consciences
or to influ-

ence them in every part of their obedience to the gospel, is persuasive
power, or the forcible conviction of truth." If all is persuasive power,
and if the Holy Spirit acts AS the soul, sense, or meaning of the words,
that is antagonistic to all that the apostle affirms when he says that
the natural man cannot know the things of the Spirit of God, " because
they are spiritually discerned." The Spirit gives all that discernment
and conveys all that meaning. Fuller, the eminent Baptist minister, and
Eev. D. Wilson, London, wrote admirably against Sandemanianism. Fuller's
letters on this subject would have been more conclusive had he followed
Sandeman step by step instead of turning aside to less able men.

It remains to sketch the doctrine of the Holy Spirit during this
nineteenth century. The revival of the British and Ameri can Churches
may be regarded as the most obvious and signal work of the Spirit during
last century, though many a similar outpouring of the Spirit has taken
place since. THE GREAT outstanding WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT in the
present century is THE SUCCESS IN MISSIONS. But as our object is to
trace the phases of doctrinal opinion more than Church life, I shall not
turn aside from this.

In all the theological thinking on the operations of the Spirit in this
country and America, the powerful influence of President Edwards may
easily be detected. Its most import ant element appears in the various
writers who, like Dwight, Byland, and others, imbibed the views
contained in the treatise on the Eeligious Affections. The more
speculative point on the so-called natural ability, often carried to an
un warrantable and dangerous extreme, was found in all the American
revivalists till Dr. Hodge and the Princeton divines withstood it, and
did much to counteract l its spread.

Here I may add that it was a wholly gratuitous collision into which
Edwards' opinions were brought with the opinions of Marshall, Hervey,
Boston, and the Marrow men, by a spirit

1 See the Princeton essays On Human Inability.

of controversy on the part of Bellamy. He represented some of the
expressions of these eminent men in a wrong light, as if they did not
hold the necessity of regeneration as antecedent to the first act of
faith. It was a misrepresentation of these great men's opinions, who
maintained in terms the most unambiguous, that regeneration is not
effected by the word without the Spirit, nor conversely by the Spirit
without the word, and that the Spirit of light and revelation in the
knowledge of Christ is the source of all spiritual affections. But the
aim of Marshall, and of the others named along with him, was to set
forth the supernatural work of regeneration as the first act of faith;'
in other words, to prove that a regenerate person is never for a moment
in possession of regeneration without the exercise of saving faith on
its object; that regeneration proceeds in order, but that the regenerate
person is never destitute of saving faith on Christ. He held that the
Spirit of God does not work faith till ice act it. He maintained, as
strongly as Edwards did, that the Spirit produces all and that ice act
all, but that there is no inoperative possession of faith as a grace of
the Spirit without its active exercise on Christ as its proper object.
And the design of so putting the matter was a practical one. He would
have men begin the exercise of faith in compliance with the word of
invitation, without waiting for the knowledge that the Spirit had
already effected in them the saving change. A few further remarks ,will
suffice for what remains to be said on the doctrine of the Spirit in
connection with modern American theology. If we except the peculiar
views of Finney and the revivalist school, whose tendency was to magnify
human ability, and to keep the Holy Spirit and His operations out of
view in all their preaching, there was little in the mode of
presentation adopted either in the old or new school to which, when
rightly explained, any Biblical divine could take just exception. There
might be different modes of explaining the nature of regeneration. Some
had their taste-theory. D wight, for instance, following in the line

of Edwards, made the change of heart consist in a relish for spiritual
objects imparted by the Holy Spirit. Others ex plained the fact by a
change of the ruling purpose or chief end. But these were only modes of
exposition where the same truth was held.

The main point of discussion between those who at bottom built on the
same foundation was, whether the Holy Spirit acts on the mind MEDIATELY
or IMMEDIATELY. But by both the agency of the Spirit was spoken of as
preceding the action of the human mind in conversion, and as the cause
of the change. The human mind was considered as only concurring with the
divine Spirit in turning the man from the error of his ways. The old
school laid emphasis on the fact that man is passive in regeneration and
active in conversion. It was held that in what is properly the act of
God the man cannot be said to be active, because he is but the party
changed, or the object on whom the change is produced. As to the new
school, it was sometimes alleged against it that the agency of the Holy
Spirit was represented wholly as that of moral suasion. But they
vehemently repelled this as an injustice.

This whole question, whether the Spirit of God acts only by the
intervention of the word, is often rendered ambiguous by the mode in
which it is stated. The question of the im mediate or mediate operation
by the Spirit is not whether God's word is used or not. Both intend to
assert that the change is effected by the word, as the instrument in the
hand of God or as the sword of the Spirit. The true mode of stating the
question is whether the word produces the result by mere moral suasion,
or by the Spirit's direct action in regenerating the mind.

The full, well-balanced doctrine of the Spirit has long been maintained
in England by the successors of the Puritans. They have handled it with
an amplitude of view, a freshness of delineation, and a spiritual tone
which leave nothing to desire. This is the eminent service rendered to
Christianity by the English Nonconformists. Not to go back to the
Baptists

of former times, those eminent men who adorned their ranks at the
beginning of this century, most of whom imbibed the views of Edwards in
the best sense, set forth in a happy combination the operations of the
Spirit with a full and free proclamation of the gospel. The circular
letter of the eloquent Robert Hall gives an admirable exposition of the
work of the Spirit and of the Church's duty; and the same thing is true
of Fuller's circular letter; both prepared in order to diffuse right
views on this momentous therne. The admirable work by Harrington Evans,
entitled The Spirit of Holiness, is the work of one who outlived the
blighting influence of Sabellianism, under which he fell for some time;
and who, subsequently to his restoration, continued for many years to
give a more emphatic testimony to the personality and work of the Spirit
than any other man perhaps has done since the time of Owen. 1 The
English Congregationalists during this century have produced several
works of much value on the doctrine of the Spirit. The exposition of
this topic by Williams in his Equity and Sovereignty, by Payne in his
Lectures, by Wardlaw in several publications, and by Stowell in his
admirable lectures on The Work of the S\^nrit, forms a literature with
which, for its deeply spiritual and experimental doctrine, every
Biblical

1 Mr. Evans, having read some of those writings of Dr. Isaac Watts which
have an all too obvious Sabcllian tendency, carne to deny the
distinction of persons in the Trinity. He published his Sabellianism in
a work entitled Dialogue\* on Important Subjects, in 1819. His history,
in connection with this change of doctrinal opinion, is full of
significance and warning. He had been an acceptable minister in the
Church of England, and much blessed in his work. The spell of his new
opinions so blinded his mind, that he did not for a time perceive all
that was involved in it. As he did not deny the work of the Spirit upon
the heart, he did not for a time suspect that the Holy Spirit was dishon
oured. When he came to see that he denied the Deity of the Son and the
real glory of the Holy Ghost in the economy of redemption, he wrote a
refutation of his own work in Letters to a Friend, by J. H. Evans, 1826.
He collected all the copies of his dialogues, and consigned them with
every mark of contrition to the flames. The whole account given in the
Memoir by his son is replete with interest. But the memorable fact is
(p. 50) that his own soul suffered, and that there was a most manifest
withering in his ministry. After his return to sound Trinitarian views,
scarcely ever was there in London a more blessed ministry than his.

divine must fully sympathize. This is their badge of distinction. The
one exception to these important contributions is the work of Dr. Jenkyn
on The Influences of the Holy Spirit. But as Dr. Payne has fully exposed
and refuted that attempt to identify the Spirit and the word, and as it
does not differ from the views of Pajoii and Junckheim, already
explained, it is not necessary to occupy space in further refutation of
that line of thought.

The work of Stowell, bating some minor points to which we have already
taken exception in this volume, is a broad and comprehensive description
of some parts of the ministra tion of the Spirit. It is limited to the
spiritual life. And its object, according to a plan formed during a
pastoral ministry of thirty years, was to "show that neither Church
traditions, philosophical theories, nor mystical imaginations, are in
accord ance with what the Spirit of God has taught concerning His own
work, but that Christian spiritualism is the harmony of divine
revelation with the consciousness of man." Mr. Stowell begins with man
rather than with the divine economy in the mission of the Holy Ghost, or
with His personality and Deity. Nor could any objection against this
method be sustained, if, in the subsequent parts of the volume,
sufficient prominence had been given to the agent and His mission as
well as to His work, which, however, we desiderate. After describing the
wrong choice which is uniformly made, and which, as he happily shows,
must be ascribed not so much to any other cause, as to an inward and
spontaneous predisposition, he arrives at the conclusion that with man
nothing becomes an actual motive, however clearly its truth may be
perceived, however seriously its reason and right and authority may be
responded to, until his spirit is changed; adding that either it must
remain undone, or God must do it (p. 49).

The valuable work of Dr. James Buchanan of a practical and devotional
character, Hare's Mission of the Comforter, Winslow's work on The
Spirit, deserved the important place

which they have occupied in public estimation. An anony mous work,
entitled The Comforter, deserves also favourable notice.

We have already referred to Dr. Wardlaw's services in con nection with
the work of the Spirit. As Dr. Payne and Mr. Stowell refer to the
correspondence carried on by Dr. Ward-law on the one side, and by the
Congregationalist Churches, from whom he separated, on the other, it may
serve, perhaps, better than any other historical facts that could be
adduced, to refer to that discussion, because the important spiritual
truth which he asserted in that controversy exhibited the true opinions
of the Congregationalist body. In order to remain in Church fellowship
with some of the neighbouring Churches, he demanded evidence that they
believed in a SPECIAL INFLU ENCE OF THE SPIRIT, and not in a mere
general influence given equally to those who believe the gospel and to
those who reject it. He cut off all evasion from those who were ready to
admit the influence of the Spirit in words and to deny it in fact. In
taking this step, which we can only commend as a faithful act of
discipline, Dr. Wardlaw declared that an agreement on the work of the
Spirit in conversion was, by the body of which he was a minister, always
held as equally essential with an agreement of sentiment regarding the
work of Christ. And he adds that the doctrine of the special influ ence
of the Spirit has been regarded as characteristic of that body in
Scotland ever since its commencement (p. 83). The professed convert
attributed his change of heart and the faith thence resulting to nothing
in himself, but to the grace of the Spirit making him to differ from
other men (p. 99).

The great question discussed in that correspondence was whether they who
are converted to God experience any direct inward influence or operation
of the Holy Spirit on their minds distinct from, but accompanying the
word. This is emphati cally affirmed by Wardlaw, and evaded but really
denied by the other party, who regarded the influence of the truth and

the influence of the Spirit as one and the same. What Dr. Wardlaw meant
by the special influence of the Spirit was His operation within the mind
and heart, accompanying the truth and rendering it efficacious; whereas
they held no influence but that of the word, or external means (p. 124).

As the parties attached to this modern Pajonism questioned or denied any
direct internal working of the Spirit in con version, and said that the
Spirit works only by His truth, His people, and Providence, the whole of
their positions were fully exposed and sometimes refuted by a happy
reductio ad absurdum, or by propounding a series of untenable supposi
tions which, according to their premises, must needs be held. Thus Dr.
Wardlaw argues—(1) The subject of conversion must be less opposed to God
than others, if the opposite view has any validity. He must have a
better disposition, and have whereof to glory contrary to Scripture (1
Cor. iv. 7); or (2) the word, or means, or instruments, must have more
power at conversion than on any former occasion; and who does not see
the absurdity of a fact or motive having more force one day than
another, when, according to the supposition, it is all external ? But
when we affirm the Biblical position, that the indisposition of the
heart is removed by the new heart being given (Ezek. xxxvi. 26), no
further difficulty remains. Dr. Wardlaw in the most cogent style of
argument proves, in opposition to his opponents, that the gospel to
which the heart is opposed can never change the heart till that gospel
is admitted, and that it can never be received without the interference
of a higher power (p. 140).

The following words will suffice to show the manner in which he conjoins
the two things—the word and Spirit:—" To show the necessity of a direct
divine agency of the Spirit in the soul of man, accompanying the word as
the instrumental means, in order to account for its conversion would
require a volume." " If the influence of the Spirit is merely the
influence of the word, of evidence, and of circumstances

z

operating on the human mind independently of any efficacious, inward,
illuminating, spiritualizing energy, then there is nothing supernatural
in the case—nothing beyond or different from the ordinary phenomena of
the mind as affected by informa tion with its attendant proofs, or
whatever else may contribute to excite attention and command assent. You
do no more than put the Spirit in the place of Providence, or of the
human agent through whose instrumentality Providence works. The means
are left to their own operation, there being no other influence
accompanying or superadded" (p. 60). After adverting to the inadequate
conceptions entertained as to the heart's alienation from God, and the
historical fact that the denial of inward special efficacious grace to
the conversion of sinners and the denial of the atonement have uniformly
gone together, the correspondence goes over all the points in debate. It
is one of the most valuable discussions polemically which has recently
appeared on the Spirit's work, and brings up and exposes the present
phase of Pajonism and Semi-Pelagianism. Dr. Wardlaw exposes the avowal
that when a sinner believes he receives the Spirit! How comes the sinner
to believe ? he exclaims; whence this spiritual perception ?

Before passing from the Congregationalist writers, to whom we owe some
of the best parts of our theological literature on the doctrine of the
Spirit, it may not be out of place to refer to a tendency among them to
explode the distinction usually made between the common and special
operations of the Spirit. They seem drawn to this by considerations
which, whether accepted or not, are entitled to respect. They wish
apparently to prove, against Arminian opponents, that it is only in His
testimony that the Spirit can be said to be resisted; that in His work,
properly so called, the Spirit is irresistible, and that He who hath
begun a good work will perform it till the day of Jesus Christ. Of
course, if that distinction can be fully estab lished, the advantages
connected with that mode of putting divine truth are obvious. However, I
am merely stating

here historically that this tendency is cropping out among their most
eminent writers. Wardlaw plainly inclines to it in the above-named
correspondence and in his system. Dr. Pye Smith thus asserts it in his
First Lines of Christian Theology (Schol. iii.): "On what is called by
many common grace and its essential difference from that which is saving
; this is riot Scriptural phraseology, it is needless, and tending to
embar rassment'' (p. 568). Dr. Payne in like manner says, "I do not
believe that the influence of the Spirit of God, in the specific and
proper sense of the term, i.e. an influence distinct from the moral or
persuasive influence of divine truth, is ever exerted except upon those
who were prepared unto glory."

Only two additional phenomena in this country demand a passing notice,
because they claim, in a peculiar sense, to owe their origin to the Holy
Spirit— IRVINGISM and PLYMOUTH BRETHRENISM. They are so vastly inferior
to their pretensions, however, that they rather awaken a feeling of
regret and pity.

As to IRVINGISM, with its ostentatious parade of supernatu ral gifts and
of extraordinary offices, which have had no real existence since the
apostolic age, it is after all smothered under ritualistic forms. Were
there nothing more to prove its hollowness, this would suffice. Such a
supply of the Spirit as this sect claims could not co-exist with its
pomp of prepared liturgical and office-forms. It was largely a revival
of Montanism ; and the way in which it committed itself to a revival of
twelve apostles for the sealing of the apocalyptic twelve thousand
immediately before the second advent (Rev. vii. 4), will prove its
death-blow, which cannot long be delayed or warded off in the nature of
things.

As to BRETHRENISM, it will have a longer existence probably than the
other phenomenon. It has produced a literature on the Holy Spirit of a
very mixed character. Mr. Darby, Mr. Kelly, ard Mr. Harris have all
written on the Holy Spirit. While many excellent things have been said
by all these

writers on the distinction which must always be carefully drawn between
Christ's work FOR us and the Spirit's work IN us, on the inhabitation of
the Spirit in the hearts of Christians, and on the communion between
Christ and His people by the Holy Ghost the Paraclete, there are three
points where their doctrinal views on the Spirit are mischievous in the
last degree. (1) They have very much resuscitated the Cocceian notions
as to the alleged low platform of the Old Testament saints. They
represent them all as burdened and fettered by the Spirit of bondage,
till one hardly sees where spirituality remains. They thus come to
divide the Church which was one from the days of Abel into two. (2) They
make a presumptuous claim to be in their assemblies under the presidency
of the Holy Ghost, as they phrase it; and, accord ingly, they venture to
carry out the decrees and resolutions come to under this imagination
with a confidence little less than apostolic. (3) They take exception to
what most other Churches, not swamped by Ritualism, have always re
garded as one of the most important and blessed duties— to prayer for
the Holy Ghost. The Church of God of all ages, according to the most
explicit Scripture examples,—the Greek Church, the Roman Church, all the
Protestant Churches, in the exercise of a deep Christian instinct,—have
invocated the Holy Ghost, and expected larger and larger supplies and
com munications ; and they grieve for and confess their sin in not
having more implored His help and presence. This sect, by an obvious
misinterpretation of Scripture, objects to the practice of praying for
the Spirit, because forsooth He was given at Pentecost.

In winding up this historical survey, we have only to add an outline of
the modern views on the doctrine of the Spirit which prevail in GERMANY,
HOLLAND, and SWITZERLAND. Germany seems to have abandoned this whole
field, as if it were no longer worthy of cultivation. There is not a
single work in the whole compass of German literature on the office

and work of the Holy Spirit, if we except the unfinished work of Kahnis,
1 of any value or importance. And when we inquire into the reason, it is
traceable partly to the dominant Sabel-lianism, partly to the utterly
misplaced importance attached to the sacraments, and which has produced
results scarcely less calamitous, notwithstanding the evangelical
preaching which prevails in Germany, than the same error has caused in
the Church of Eome. The Lutheran Church system is such that it does not
require the Spirit's work for the application of redemption. What other
Churches ascribe to the Holy Spirit, the Lutheran Church ascribes to the
sacraments and Church ordinances; and these opinions are so diffused
through the community, and so dominate the minds of clergy and laity
alike, that there remains in reality in the ecclesiastical or
theological mind no place for the operations of the Spirit on the
individual. Regeneration is identified with baptism. Prayer for the
Spirit is deemed superfluous, because the sacra ments are always equally
replenished with blessings. A new supply or outpouring of the Spirit is,
according to them, an English or American extravagance.

There is A THREEFOLD STANDPOINT OF THEOLOGICAL CON CEPTION which, during
the present generation, has moved the German mind. One extremely
negative tendency proceeded on the supposition that Christianity had
outlived itself, and that what had been regarded as the life-principle
of the Church in all ages, faith in the historical Person of Jesus,

1 Kahnis, Die Lchre vom Heilicjen Geiste, Halle 1847. Having procured
the first part of this work thirty-five years ago, I eagerly waited for
its continuation. The writer had before this published a Latin tractate
denying the personality of the Spirit. Here he asserts the opposite
view, and in an able, erudite way adduces the Patristic testimony down
to Origen. Whether the author wearied of his subject, or Germany showed
no interest in it, or whatever was the cause, the learned author never
proceeded further with his undertaking. The only other recent works on
the doctrine of the Spirit in the whole compass of German literature are
the two following small treatises, of no great importance : (1) Wb'rmer,
Das Verhaltniss des Gewtes zum Solme Gottes, Stuttgard 1862 ; and (2)
Die BedfMtung des Heilirjen Gelstes bezuylich der avferstehung des
Leibes (anonymous), Basle 1866.

incarnate, crucified, and risen, the Redeemer of sinful humanity and the
source of life, must give way before another, a new and spiritualized,
form which disengages the idea from the shell of the historical
manifestation. Against this tendency all Christians in all lands
maintained the same positive historical belief. But two other
tendencies, while at one in opposing the above-named school of Baur and
Strauss, diverged from each other in carrying out their special
conception of Christianity. A second tendency, therefore, held firmly by
the ecclesiastically given form in which Chris tianity had won its
triumphs as a missionary power among the nations, and as a principle of
reformation from the cor ruptions of Popery; and they were disposed to
regard this as necessary for the future as it had been powerful in the
past. A third tendency attempted to continue at one with Rationalism in
the principles of philologico-historical interpretation, and only
desired a more spirited application of them. They would not break the
thread of development where Rationalism began.

This last tendency, known as the mediating school, which took its rise
with Schleiermacher (A.D. 1820-34), did not recognise THE PERSONALITY OF
THE HOLY SPIRIT, and con sequently had nothing to say as to His WORK.
Schleier-macher's views were in most things antagonistic to the Church
doctrines. It may be said of Schleiermacher's system, though we cannot
in this place completely analyse it, that it struck to the core the mind
of his country, casting many in its mould, and in others setting in
motion an un wonted energy of action and reaction such as nothing but
the mighty impulse of a mighty spirit could create. In his system all
the great doctrines connected with God as an authoritative lawgiver fall
into the background. But great and glowing prominence is given to all
the views which stand connected with the Person of Jesus as a fountain
of spiritual influence. The centre round which His whole theology moved

was, to use his own expression, the communion of life with the Redeemer
(Lebens Gcmeinschaft mit dem Erloser}.

But in reference to the distinction which obtains between the Persons of
the Godhead, his views were Sabellian: Christ as the Logos, said he,
apart from his manifestation in a par ticular Person (!), belongs to
ecclesiastical conceptions; and instead of a personal Holy Ghost he
speaks merely of " the common Spirit of the Christian Church proceeding
from God." The Schleiermacher school, which has risen to great influence
and is still rising, bore the distinct impress of Sabellianism or
Modalism from its commencement. An ingenious essay 1 appeared from the
pen of Schleiermacher expressly comparing the Athanasian and Sabellian
doctrine, and assigning the marked superiority to the Sabellian theory.
But, ingenious as the exposition undoubtedly was, it was highly unjust
to Biblical Trinitarianism. The entire school, so far as it abides by
Schleiermacher's principles, cannot be regarded as assert ing anything
approaching to sound ecclesiastical Trinitari anism. In as far as it has
accepted Schleiermacher's opinions on this point, and it has done so
with a greater or less general consent, we find nothing but the
indwelling scheme or the Sabellian view of Jesus. In every form of
Sabellianism—of the modern not less than the ancient type—there has
always been and must be a certain affinity to Pantheism. In
Schleiermacher's essay, already referred to, it was strongly asserted
that Christian faith did not expressly teach the Deity of Christ. It was
alleged that Deity was attributed to Him only in hymns, poetical
effusions, and rhetorical addresses; that the Church-doctrine of the
Trinity arose in Alexandria through a Platonizing tendency and in a
philo sophical interest; and that, but for this, the Sabellian doctrine,
which accepts no personal distinction in the Godhead, would doubtless
have become the predominant opinion. Not only

1 This essay originally appeared in the Theoloyische Zeitschrlft von
Schleier macher, De Wette, itnd Lilcke. Drittes Heft.

so, he goes on to affirm still further that Sabdlianism satisfies the
demands of Christian piety as well as the Church-doctrine ; and that it
has this peculiar consideration to recommend it, that while the
Church-doctrine is transcendent, the Sabellian view, on the contrary,
refers to the order of salvation and to God's relation to the world.
According to this Modalism, which has no tri-personal God, the name SON
OF GOD means no more than God redeeming; and the name SPIRIT OF GOD
means no more than the union of God with the Christian Church without
distinct personality.

On the contrary, all sound Trinitarian divines have main tained that the
very transcendence of the Church-doctrine which Schleiermacher
depreciates is its true glory. They assert that all the Persons of the
Trinity are what they are prior to creation, prior to redemption, prior
to the formation of the Christian Church. These deeds only manifested
what the Persons were essentially from all eternity. They only revealed
themselves by deeds of power and of grace. They were divine Persons with
a distinct subsistence prior to and irrespective of any deeds performed
in creation, in redemption, or in regeneration. But we limit ourselves
here to the work of the Holy Ghost. It is evident from Scripture that
men were regenerated by the Spirit, and raised up by Him to do a work
for God, previous to the formation of the Christian Church; and that
multitudes in all the ages subsequent to the fall, and prior to the day
of Pentecost, were enlightened by Him with a true spiritual knowledge,
and possessed with a true spirituality of mind. All this, as we read in
the Old Testament records, was going on before the Pentecostal effusion
of the Spirit. The Holy Spirit dwelt in prophets and righteous men in
the Old Testament as well as in the supernaturally gifted office-bearers
of the New Testament Church; and the Spirit could not have so dwelt in
them unless He really subsisted as a divine Person, with a distinct
personality in the Godhead. Nor was that all: the Holy

Spirit was the cause of all the vast variety of miracles in both
economies, and the author of all Old Testament prophecy as well as of
all New Testament Scripture; both of which are spoken of as the work of
the same Spirit, with no difference as to their origin or authority (2
Pet. i. 21).

If all this is so, in vain do these Sabellian writers allege that the
Spirit is but the union of God with the Christian Church. According to
Schleiermacher's outline of the Sabellian theory, moreover, it is
maintained that the Holy Spirit is hit the Spirit of the whole, the
common Spirit of the Christian Church. It is difficult to apprehend
precisely what that means. But the explanation which he himself gives of
the statement is in the last degree startling: " The Spirit," says he, "
is only in the whole: for as the Spirit is just the God head, every
Christian must be a Christ, IF THE SPIRIT AS SUCH WERE IN EVERY
INDIVIDUAL." The more that the reader attempts to apprehend the import
of that statement, the more surprise and pain take possession of every
reverent mind. But plainly, according to the meaning of the terms, the
only difference between Christ and the Christian is to be traced to a
more and a less of the inhabiting Godhead; and the state ment implies
that the Spirit, so understood, is RELATED TO THE CHURCH AS A WHOLE, as
the Deity in Christ is related to His humanity. The writer, with all his
vast powers, plainly knew not what he said, nor whereof he affirmed.

Such is modern Sabellianism as set forth by its greatest modern
defender. It is fully discredited by the mere state ment of the
Scripture testimony that the Spirit's activity preceded the existence of
what is known as the Christian Church.

To do justice to the school of Schleiermacher, among whose scholars
there are many who have risen far above him in single points, it must be
stated that it loyally adheres to historical Christianity, and maintains
the foundation on which the Church has been supported from the
beginning. They

who belong to it, however, are (1) neither acquainted with the true
distinction between the work of Christ and the work of the Spirit, nor
able to put them in their proper place and due relation to each other.
Of course they cannot do so, fur they have no doctrine of the Spirit,
and cannot make a due distinction between the work of Christ and the
work of the Spirit on a Sabellian basis which denies His personality.
Xor is this strange. For if the belief of a personal Holy Spirit
naturally leads men to an admission of His super natural works as
something that belongs to Him in the diviue economy, and especially to
receive the inspired Scriptures as the standing monument of His
activity, we may affirm, on the contrary, that a Sabellian view of the
Spirit naturally leads men to the denial of the supernatural in any
form.

​(2) Another peculiarity of the Schleiermacher school is their
watchword, THE CHRISTIAN CONSCIOUSNESS, OR THE TESTIMONY OF THE HOLY
SPIRIT. They use both expressions, when in point of fact they, for the
most part, have no personal Holy Ghost. They build on a Sabellian
foundation, and yet retain the theological nomenclature in a sense
entirely different from that which was usually accepted by their
predecessors. What testimony of the Spirit can there be, and what
Christian consciousness in any right sense of the expression can there
be, without the regeneration of the Holy Ghost renewing the heart and
occupying it by a true inhabitation ? It can have no underlying reality,
and amounts only to a figure of speech. Their whole style of thought on
the Christian consciousness is a mere phrase, and a wholly unwarrantable
use is made of it when it is made a test and judge of Scripture.

A few remarks will prove this. There is no Christian consciousness
without a sense of six. But the school in question maintains tenets on
the subject of sin which wholly undermine God's moral government, the
nature and sanctions of the divine law, as well as the holy anger of
God. This was expressed by Schleiermacher in an explicit denial of the

fall and of sin. Sin was made a law of being—a dogma that undermines all
reference to God's justice, as well as all necessity for a propitiation.
The Lord Jesus was, indeed, depicted in glowing terms as the source of
life and light, of joy and strength, but not as the Eternal Son, and
only as a person inhabited by God in a wholly unique, way. We will not
deny that many pleasing views are given forth by Schleier-macher and his
school on the spiritual union between Jesus and His people, and on the
indwelling presence of Christ. In reference, however, to the sinner's
objective relation towards God there is a total blank; and even they who
have advanced the farthest beyond their master's limits have but dim,
undecided, and vacillating views on all the truths connected with man's
acceptance with the Judge of all the earth. Schleiermacher's watchword
was: religion is feeling. And carrying out this dogma, he everywhere
asserts that doctrine is only an imperfect attempt to embrace in our
conceptions the true, the infinite, and the eternal; that it is
one-sided, mutable, and liable to error; and that, while faith and
religion are in all alike the same, each one, after he has done his
utmost to elaborate the truth in his own way, has merely his own
individual representation of it. Thus men, by wisdom, display the
opposite of wisdom when they do not bow to the authority of the pure
arid perfect word of God.

Yet this so-called Christian consciousness is made the arbiter and judge
of Scripture. If the Christian conscious ness were definitely understood
to be the sentiment of regenerate men, inhabited by the personal Holy
Spirit, it would be entitled to some measure of respect. It would have
much in common with Edwards' treatise on the Religious Affections, or
with the subjective spirituality of the Puritans. As it is, it is
natural feeling in many cases, not spiritual feeling; a mere public
sentiment, wide enough to take in the consciousness of any man who is
not an atheist—a Strauss or Eenan. It does not presuppose regeneration
by the Spirit.

The Bible does not regulate this Christian consciousness, but conversely
the latter is used as the judge and arbiter of the Bible.

Nor (3) has this school any right conception of the Scrip tures as the
production of the personal Holy Ghost speaking by human agents. This
also follows from the denial of a personal Holy Ghost. For any amount of
free-thinking on the sacred Scriptures they are prepared, if only faith
on the personal Redeemer and vital intercourse with Him can by any means
be retained. Schleiermacher declared his deep conviction that faith in
the revelation of God in Christ is nowise dependent on belief in a
peculiar inspiration among the Jewish people up to a certain point; and
he affirmed that nothing essential is lost thereby; that Christ remains
the same, and faith in Him remains the same. All the scholars of
Schleiermacher occupy the same unworthy relation to the Holy Scriptures.

The testimony of THE DUTCH CHURCH in behalf of the doctrine of the
Spirit has, since the Synod of Dort, been always more clear and
effective than that of Germany. ])uring the last hundred years they have
not contributed anything of much importance on the doctrine of the
Spirit; and they are beginning to lose their independence to such a
degree that they are content to register the last results of German
thought and criticism. A few words will suffice to describe what has
been done on the doctrine of the Spirit. At the close of last century,
when Germany was beginning to surrender the divine Personality of the
Spirit as they had surrendered His Work, we find a protest from Holland.
Pro fessor Clarisse prepared two interesting treatises, one in Latin and
another in Dutch, in which he successfully asserted the Biblical
doctrine of the Deity of the Holy Spirit (1795). After the formation of
the Hague Society for the defence of the Christian religion, there
appeared as answers to the prescribed subject essays of considerable
merit on the Deity

of the Holy Spirit by Lotze, Corstius, and Beuzekamp. In 1838, Heyningen
published a little treatise which he kept by him upwards of twenty
years, after unsuccessfully offer ing it as one of the prize essays on
the doctrine of the Bible respecting the work of the Holy Spirit. It is
a useful work, but with a very flagrant defect. The defect is, that he
abstains from pronouncing with the firm, decisive tone which is
absolutely necessary on the point which draws the line between
Augustinianism and Semi-Pelagianism. The reader peruses it and is at a
loss ivhcther the author means that it is we or God that decisively
wills the conversion of the soul. No one can say whether, according to
Heyningen, it is God in the first instance that works in us to will and
to do. But the rest of the work is valuable. He maintains, from a
Biblical evidence which cannot be shaken, that the operation of the
Spirit is distinct from the effect of the word, though con current with
God's providence and the preaching of the word. This is set forth in a
clear and satisfactory light. When we come farther down we trace the
growing influence of German thought on the Dutch Church, and by no means
to its advantage. Two prize essays prepared for the Hague Society
appeared in 1844, the one by Thoden Van Velzen, the other by Stemler the
Lutheran pastor at Hoorn. They are far from satisfactory. They give no
testimony on the Personality of the Holy Spirit, which they leave in
such absolute uncertainty that these writers can only be described as
ignoring the subject; and what they say about the Spirit's Work is as
vague and unmeaning as about His divine personality. The whole two
volumes are occupied with a metaphysico-theolo-gico-exegetical attempt
to harmonize man's free agency with a certain influence which is not the
regeneration of the Holy Ghost, .

The Swiss and FRENCH CHURCHES of this century have produced very little
on the doctrine of the Holy Spirit. Like the Church of Holland, which we
have just noticed, these

Churches are losing their independence, and coming unduly under the
spell of German theology and criticism. There are two interesting works,
however, which have appeared in French Switzerland on the doctrine of
the Spirit, one by E. Guers, Bern, another by Tophel in the form of five
discourses, both written with warmth, devotional feeling, and unction.
One point is very forcibly insisted on by Guers, the danger of the
Spirit without the word, and of the word without the Spirit.

It is now time to bring this historical sketch to an end. And in doing
so I have only to remark—what Church history sufficiently verifies—that
without a full testimony to the divine personality and agency of the
Holy Spirit, no blessing can be expected on the ministrations of any
Church. He is honoured by being invoked in every prayer, and by being
referred to in every sermon. Wherever religion comes in power, the
presence of the Spirit as connecting the Church on earth with Christ in
heaven occupies a large place in the Church's consciousness and
adorations. The doctrine of the Spirit not less than the doctrine of
justification by faith in Christ's merits, is the article of a standing
or falling Church, and without the recognition of it no religious
prosperity exists or can exist.

This historical survey of past centuries, bringing succes sively under
our notice epochs of Revival, such as the age of Augustine, the
Reformation, and the great awakening of last century, naturally suggests
a closing remark which may not be out of place. The Church of God is in
her right attitude only when she is waiting for the fresh outpouring of
the Holy Spirit, who comes from Christ and leads to Christ. We see
combined in all successful preachers of the gospel right views of the
Spirit's operations, an undiverted gaze upon the cross, and a
proclamation of the fact that the Spirit comes to glorify the Son in His
Person and in His offices. Thus we hear one exclaiming: " Spirit of
preaching, that is, Spirit of

Christ, come down upon me." \* They have always set forth that spiritual
life flows from the historical Christ the Surety through the Holy Ghost,
and that though the Spirit comes not of necessity, but of free
condescending love, He comes as the Spirit of our risen Lord, the organ
by which He acts, the executive by whom He rules, the Comforter sent in
Christ's name (John xvi. 13). And for the present sore and ulcerated
condition of the Church, with many marked defects and perilous
tendencies, nothing but a new effusion of the Spirit will avail. Many of
these tendencies would be at once obviated by the efficacious presence
of the Spirit. Of many currents which might be enumerated, the following
three may be named, which all too plainly argue a want of the Spirit's
power, viz. irreverent criticism of Scripture, sensuous Ptitualism, and
spasmodic efforts put forth to produce by human appliances what can only
be effected by the Holy Spirit:—

​1. As to the bold criticism of Scripture, proceeding as it does on a
denial of its inspiration by the Spirit, it has no significance and no
attractions for a mind that has personally come under the supernatural
and regenerating operations of the Spirit. Such a mind accepts on
sufficient evidence with out difficulty all the divine facts and
prophecies—in other words, all the miracles of power and of knowledge
with which Scripture is replete, but which the higher criticism,
starting from a philosophy opposed to the supernatural, exerts itself to
the utmost to explode.

​2. As to the wide-spread Eitualism, it springs from a desire to
substitute something sensuous for that which constitutes the true charm
and glory of all religious ordinances—the presence and power of the Holy
Spirit. It betrays an unrest, a want which the ritualist knows not how
to relieve. To a mind replenished with the Holy Spirit, ritualistic
elements have no interest or attraction.

​3. With regard to the spasmodic efforts to awaken by human

1 The missionary Macdonald.

appliances a religious interest in the minds of others, we must
distinguish two things that differ. There is, on the one hand, a noble
revival spirit, burning with a pure and steady flame, which is kindled
and kept alive in proportion as the Holy Spirit inhabits and quickens
the Christian heart to sustained and strenuous efforts for the salvation
of others. It springs from the Spirit of grace: it leads to dependence
on the Spirit's supernatural operations ; and they who cherish it never
forget that success is not by might nor by power, but by the Spirit of
the Lord (Zech. iv. 6). But, on the other hand, there is effort of a
different sort—spasmodic and fitful, from self and for self, arguing
impatience at the slow progress of the king dom of God, and prompting
measures of the earth earthy. Impure and of a mixed character, it burns
itself out; and is succeeded by despondency, exhaustion, and
dissatisfaction. Wholly different are those efforts which are kindled by
the Spirit and done in the strength of the Spirit. The effects are
blessed and abiding to the glory of the Spirit's power and "race.

THE END.

MORRISON AND OIBB, EDINBURGH, PRINTERS TO HER MAJESTY'S STATIONERY
OFFICE.

;70

INDEX TO TEXTS ELUCIDATED.

ABILITY, distinction between physical

and moral, 197.

Adoption of sons by the Spirit ex hibited in various ways in Paul,

John, and Synoptics, 192. Amyraldism, 322. Anointed One, the, 40 ; why
needed,

129 ; the Son operating by the

Spirit, 130. Arianism, 270, 317. Arminianism, 317. Attributes of the
Spirit, divine, 110 ;

omniscience, 111 ; creation of all,

​110. Augustin's views of grace, 297, 308 ;

quoted, 168. Awakening, the great, of last century,

249 ; peculiar mode of preaching,

253 ; and of praying, 254, 339.

BAPTISMAL formula, 257 ; baptism of Christ, 127.

CHURCH, one, in Old and New Testa ment, 242 ; a holy society and mis
sionary institute, 244.

Comforter, the, 101.

Confessions, Lutheran and Reformed, 312.

Congregationalist writers on the Spirit, 349.

Constantinople, Council of, 276 ; troubled time between first and second
Council, 273.

Co-ordinate rank of the Spirit, 113.

DEITY of the Spirit, 109 ; proof of, from name of God given Him, 114.

Dorner's theory of incarnation without a fall, 13.

Doxologies to Trinity, 258.

EDWARDS' influence and opinions, 342. Epochs, three, in Greek Church on

procession, 281. Erasmus on free-will, 309. Ethics, Christian, 212.
Evans, J. H., work of, 350.

FAITH, a dead, 202; spirit of, 191 ,-Reformers' views of, 308.

Fathers, defects of Greek, 263 ; differ ence between Greek and Latin, on
grace, 292 ; testimony to inspiration, 262.

Forfeiture of the Spirit, 200.

Foster on prayer, 255.

GIVER, the, of the Spirit, Christ, 41,

134.

Gnostics, 98. Gregory Nazianzen's saying, 6.

HOWE'S living temple, 14.

IMMACTILATP: nature of Mary not neces sary, 123.

Inspiration, work of the Spirit in, 137-160.

JUNCKHEIM'S treatise, effect arid cause,

​335. Justin Martyr, quotations from, 258.

KAHNIS on the Spirit, 97, 357.

LIFE, spiritual, 205.

Luther, de servo arbitrio, 309.

MACEDONIANISM, 273.

Marcionites, and the formula against,

​258. Mediate or immediate operation of the

Spirit, 349.

Ministry of the Spirit, 245. Miraculous gifts of the Spirit, 29, 50.
Missions, success of, 347. Montanism, 269.

OMNIPRESENCE of Spirit, 111. Orange, Synod of, 302. Owen, Dr., work of,
329.

PAJONISM, 322. Pelagius and his system, 295. Person in the Trinity, 99.
Personality of the Spirit, 95 ; proved,

INDEX TO SUBJECTS AND WBITERS.

103 ; less behold than tliat of Christ

at present, 104. Personification not used, 98 ; where it

is found, 99. Presence of Christ in the Church along

with the Spirit's activity, 237 ;

presence of the Spirit, 210. Prevenient grace, 211. Procession, writers
on, 290 ; doctrine

of, 105 ; writers who deny it, 107 ;

consequences of the denial, 109.

REFORMATION view of grace, 308. Regeneration by the Spirit, 162, 187.
Reinhard on the Spirit's efficacious

grace, 338. Ritualism, 240.

Sabellianism, 8, 267, 353. Sanctification of the Spirit, 219, 226 ;

inward conflict, 227. Sandemanianism, 345. Satan, doctrine of, in Greek
Church,

190.

Schleiermacher, 8, 353. Schubert's Pajonism, 334. Semi-Pelagianisin,
300. Semisch on Greek Fathers, 263. Spirit, Holy, import of, 105 ;
restored

by Christ's mediatorship alone, 163 ;

His operation next to that of the

Son, 120 ; inhabitation of, 206, 209. Spirit of faith, 191 ; operation
on the

will, 189 ; the Spirit's work not

subsequent to the believing recep

tion of Christ, 190 ; given through

preaching the cross, 246 ; the Holy

Spirit in the Church, 230. Spirit withdrawn at the fall. 164 ;

Spirit of God, import of, 99 ; the

Spirit Christ's guide, 126. Storr's treatise on the Spirit, 338. Swiss
writers on the Spirit, 366. Synergism, 314.

TEMPLE of the Spirit, 10. Tendencies, modern, 366. Tertullian against
Praxeas, 268. Testimony of the Spirit, 159 ; a false

view of, 362. Tittinann's treatise on the Spirit, 338.

UNCTION of the Spirit on Christ, 118 ;

the three grades, 121. Union, mystical, 207. Unitarian attack, 317.
Unpardonable sin, different opinions,

1S3.

WAKBUUTOX, Bishop, doctrine of the Spirit, 331.

Will, free, 167 ; how the Spirit antici pates, 198.

Witness of the Spirit, or assurance, 193.

Worship of the Spirit, 112.

Writers who deny the Spirit's person ality, 23, 268, 358.

ZWINCLIAXISM, 240.

PUBLICATIONS OF

T. AND T. CLARK,

38 GEORGE STREET, EDINBURGH.

Adam (J., D.D.)— AN EXPOSITION OF THE EPISTLE OF JAMES. Svo, 9s.
Alexander (Dr. J. A.)— COMMENTARY ON THE PROPHECIES OF ISAIAH.

New and Revised Edition. Two vols. 8vo, 17s.

Ante-Nicene Christian Library—A COLLECTION OF ALL THE WORKS OF THE
FATHERS OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH PRIOR TO THE COUNCIL OF NIC\^EA.
Twenty-four vols. 8vo, Subscription price, £6, 6s.

Auberlen (C. A.)— THE DIVINE REVELATION. 8vo, 10s. 6d. Augustine's
Works—Edited by MARCUS DODS, D.D. Fifteen vols. Svo, Subscription price,
£3, 19s.

Bannerman (Professor)— THE CHURCH OF CHRIST : A Treatise on the Nature,
Powers, Ordinances, Discipline, and Government of the Christian Church.
Two vols. Svo, 21s.

Baumgarten (Professor)— APOSTOLIC HISTORY ; Being an Account of

the Development of the Early Church in the form of a Commentary on the
Acts of the Apostles. Three vols. Svo, 27s.

Beck (Dr.)— OUTLINES OF BIBLICAL PSYCHOLOGY. Crown Svo, 4s.

• PASTORAL THEOLOGY. Shortly.

Bengel— GNOMON OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. With Original Notes,

Explanatory and Illustrative. Five vols. Svo, Subscription price, 31s.
6d. Cheaper Edition, the Jive volumes bound in three, 24s.

Besser (Dr. Rudolph)— BIBLICAL STUDIES ON ST. JOHN'S GOSPEL.

Two vols. crown Svo, 12s.

Binnie (Wm., D.D.)— THE CHURCH. Bible Class Handbooks. Crown Svo, Is.
6d.

Bleek (Professor)— AN INTRODUCTION TO THE NEW TESTAMENT.

Two vols. Svo, 21s.

Bowman (T., M.A.)— EASY AND COMPLETE HEBREW COURSE : Con taining Hebrew
Grammar, Exercises, and Lexicon. Svo. Part I., 7s. 6d.; Part II., 10s.
6d.

Briggs (Prof. C.A., D.D.)— BIBLICAL STUDY : Its Principles, Methods,

and History. With a Preface by Rev. Prof. BRUCE, D.D., Glasgow. Post
Svo, 7s. 6d.

Brown (David, D.D.)— CHRIST'S SECOND COMING: Will it be Pre-

Millennial ? Seventh Edition, crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

THE EPISTLE TO THE KOMANS. Bible Class Handbooks. Price 2s.

Bruce (A. B., D.D.)— THE TRAINING OF THE TWELVE ; or, Exposition

of Passages in the Gospels exhibiting the Twelve Disciples of Jesus
under Discipline for the Apostleship. Third Edition, Svo, 10s. 6d.

THE HUMILIATION OF CHRIST, in its Physical, Ethical, and

Official Aspects. Second Edition, Svo, 10s. 6d.

Buchanan (Professor)— THE DOCTRINE OF JUSTIFICATION : An Out line of its
History in the Church, and of its Exposition from Scripture, with
special reference to recent attacks on the Theology of the Reformation.
(Second Series of Cunningham Lectures.) Svo, 10s. 6d.

ON COMFORT IN AFFLICTION. Crown Svo, 2s. Gd.

ON IMPROVEMENT OF AFFLICTION. Crown Svo, 2s. Gd.

T. and T. Clark's Publications.

Bungener (Felix)— ROME AND THE COUNCIL IN THE NINETEENTH

CENTURY. Crown 8vo, 5s.

Calvin — His LIFE, LABOURS, AND WHITINGS. By FELIX BUNGENER.

8vo, 8s. 6d.

INSTITUTES OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. Translated by

HENRY BEVERIDGE. Two vols. 8vo, 14s. Calvini Institutio Christianas
Keligionis. Curavit A. THOLUCK.

Two vols. 8vo, Subscription price, 14s.

Candlish (Rev. Professor)— THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENTS. Bible Class

Handbooks. Crown Svo, Is. 6d.

Caspar! (C. E.)—A CHRONOLOGICAL AND GEOGRAPHICAL INTRODUC TION TO THE
LIFE OF CHRIST. 8vo, 9s.

Gaspers (A.)— THE FOOTSTEPS OF CHRIST. Crown Svo, 7s. Gel.

Cave (Professor)— THE SCRIPTURAL DOCTRINE OF SACRIFICE. Demy

8vo, 12s.

Christlieb (Dr.)— MODERN DOUBT AND CHRISTIAN BELIEF. A Series

of Apologetic Lectures addressed to Earnest Seekers after Truth. Fourth
Edition, Svo, 10s. 6d.

Cotterill (J. M.)— PEREGRINUS PROTEUS : An Investigation into

certain Relations between De Morte Peregrini, the Two Epistles of
Clement to the Corinthians, etc. Svo, 12s.

Cousin (Victor)— LECTURES ON THE TRUE, THE BEAUTIFUL, AND THE

GOOD. Post Svo, 6s. 6d.

Cremer (Professor)— BIBLICO-THEOLOGICAL LEXICON OF NEW TESTA

MENT GREEK. Third Edition, demy 4to, 25s.

Crippen (Rev. T. G.)—A POPULAR INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY

OF CHRISTIAN\* DOCTRINE. Svo, 9s. Cunningham (Principal)— HISTORICAL
THEOLOGY. A Review of the

Principal Doctrinal Discussions in the Christian Church since the
Apostolic Age. Second Edition, Two vols. Svo, 21s.

REFORMERS AND THEOLOGY OF THE REFORMATION. 8vo,10s. 6d.

DISCUSSIONS ON CHURCH PRINCIPLES. Svo, 10s. CJ.

Curtiss (Dr. S. I.)— THE LEVITICAL PRIESTS. A Contribution to the

Criticism of the Pentateuch. Crown Svo, 5s.

Dabney (R. L., D.'D.)— THE SENSUALISTIC PHILOSOPHY OF THE

NINETEENTH CENTURY CONSIDERED. Crown Svo, 6s.

LECTURES ON SYSTEMATIC AND POLEMIC THEOLOGY. Second

Edition, imperial 8vo, 16s.

Davidson (Professor)— AN INTRODUCTORY HEBREW GRAMMAR. "With

Progressive Exercises in Reading and "Writing. Sixth Edition, 8vo, 7s.
6d.

THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. Bible Class Handbooks. Crown

8vo, 2s. 6d.

Delitzsch (Professor)— A SYSTEM OF BIBLICAL PSYCHOLOGY. Second

Edition, Svo, 12s.

COMMENTARY ON JOB. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

COMMENTARY ON PSALMS. Three vols. Svo, 31s. Gd.

ON THE PROVERBS OF SOLOMON. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

ON THE SONG OF SOLOMON AND ECCLESIASTES. Svo, 10s. Gd.

OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY OF REDEMPTION. Lectures

Translated from, the MS. bv Professor S. I. Cr;;riss. Crown 8vo, 4s. 6d.

T. and T. Clark's Piiblications.

Delitzsch (Prof.)— COMMENTARY ON ISAIAH. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.

ON THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.

Dods (Marcus, D.D.)— THE POST-EXILIAN PROPHETS — HAGGAI,

ZECHARIAH, MALACHI. "With Introduction and Notes. Bible Class Hand
books. Crown 8vo, 2s.

THE BOOK or GENESIS. Bible Class Handbooks. Cr. 8vo, 2s.

Doedes (Dr. J.)— MANUAL OF HERMENEUTICS FOR THE NEW TESTA MENT. Crown
8vo, 3s.

Dollinger (Dr.)— HIPPOLYTUS AND CALLISTUS ; or, The Eoman Church in the
First Half of the Third Century. 8vo, 9s.

Dorner (Professor)— HISTORY OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE DOCTRINE

OF THE PERSON OF CHRIST. Five vols. 8vo, £2, 12s. 6d.

SYSTEM OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. Four vols. 8vo, £2, 2s.

HISTORY OF PROTESTANT THEOLOGY, particularly in Germany,

viewed according to its Fundamental Movement, and in connection with the
Religioiis, Moral, and Intellectual Life. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.

Douglas (Principal)— THE BOOK OF JUDGES. Bible Class Handbooks.

Crown 8vo, Is. 3d.

THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. Bille Class Handbooks. Cr. Svo, Is. 6d.

Eadie (Professor)— COMMENTARIES ON ST. PAUL'S EPISTLES TO THE

GALATIANS, EPIIESIANS, PHILIFPIANS, COLOSSIANS. New and Revised Edi
tions, Edited by Rev. WILLIAM YOUNG, M. A. Four vols. Svo, 10s. 6d.
each.

Ebrard (Dr. J. H. A.)— THE GOSPEL HISTORY: A Compendium of

Critical Investigations in support of the Four Gospels. Svo, 10s. 6d.

COMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLES OF ST. JOHN. Svo, 10s. 6d.

Elliott (Chas., D.D.)—A TREATISE ON THE INSPIRATION OF THE HOLY

SCRIPTURES. Svo, 6s.

Ernesti— PRINCIPLES OF BIBLICAL INTERPRETATION OF NEW TESTA MENT. Two
vols. fcap. Svo, 8s.

Ewald (Heinrich)— SYNTAX OF THE HEBREW LANGUAGE OF THE OLD

TESTAMENT. Svo, 8s. 6d.

Fairbairn (Principal)— TYPOLOGY OF SCRIPTURE, viewed in connection

with the series of Divine Dispensations. Sixth Edition, Two vols. Svo,
21s.

THE EEVELATION OF LAW IN SCRIPTURE, considered with

respect both to its own Nature and to its relative place in Successive
Dispen sations. (The Third Series of Cunningham Lectures.) 8vo, 10s. 6d.

EZEKIEL AND THE BOOK OF HIS PROPHECY : An Exposition.

Fourth Edition, Svo, 10s. 6d.

PROPHECY VIEWED IN ITS DISTINCTIVE NATURE, ITS SPECIAL

FUNCTIONS, AND PROPER INTERPRETATIONS. Second Edition, Svo, 10s. 6d. NEW
TESTAMENT HERMENEUTICAL MANUAL. 8vo, 10s. 6d.

THE PASTORAL EPISTLES. The Greek Text and Translation.

With Introduction, Expository Notes, and Dissertations. Svo, 7s. 6d.

PASTORAL THEOLOGY : A Treatise on the Office and Duties of

the Christian Pastor. "With a Memoir of the Author. Crown Svo, 6s.

Fisher (G-. B., D.D.)— THE BEGINNINGS OF CHRISTIANITY, with a View

of the State of the Roman World at the Birth of Christ. Svo, 12s.

T. and T. Clark' s Publications.

Forbes (Professor)— THE SYMMETRICAL STRUCTURE OF SCRIPTURE ;

or, Scripture Parallelism Exemplified. 8vo. 8s. 6d.

. ANALYTICAL COMMENTARY ox THE EPISTLE TO THE KOMANS,

tracing the Train of Thought by the aid of Parallelism. 8vo, 10s. 6d.

Gebhardt (H.)— THE DOCTRINE OF THE APOCALYPSE, AND ITS RELATION

TO THE DOCTRINE OF THE GOSPEL AND EPISTLES OF JOHN. 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Gerlach— COMMENTARY ON THE PENTATEUCH. 8vo, 10s. Gd. Gieseler (Dr. J. C.
L.)—A COMPENDIUM OF ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.

Five vols. 8vo, £2, 12s. 6d.

Gifford (Canon)— VOICES OF THE PROPHETS : Twelve Lectures preached

on the Foundation of Bishop "Warburton. Crown 8vo, 5s.

Given (Rev. Prof. J. J.)— THE TRUTHS OF SCRIPTURE IN CONNECTION

WITH KEVEI.ATION, INSPIRATION\*, AND THE CANON. 8vo, 9s. Glasgow
(Professor)— THE APOCALYPSE TRANSLATED AND EXPOUNDED.

8vo, 14s.

Gloag (Paton J., D.D.)—A CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL COMMENTARY

ON THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Two Vols. 8vO, 21s.

THE MESSIANIC PROPHECIES. The, Baird Lecture, 1879. In

crown 8vo, price 7s. 6d.

INTRODUCTION TO THE PAULINE EPISTLES. 8vo, 12s.

Godet (Prof.)— COMMENTARY ON ST. LUKE'S GOSPEL. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.

COMMENTARY ON ST. JOHN'S GOSPEL. Three vols. 8vo, 31s. 6d.

— COMMENTARY ON ST. PAUL'S EPISTLE TO THE KOMANS. Two

vols. Svo, 21s.

LECTURES IN DEFENCE OF THE CHRISTIAN FAITH. Cr. Svo, 6s.

Goebel (Siegfried)— THE PARABLES OF JESUS. Svo, 10s. Gd. Gotthold's
Emblems; or, INVISIBLE THINGS UNDERSTOOD BY THINGS

THAT ARE MADE. Crown 8vo, 5s.

Hagenbach (Dr. K. R.)— HISTORY OF DOCTRINES. Translated from the last
Edition, and edited, with large additions from various sources. Three
vols. Svo, 31s. 6d.

- HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION IN GERMANY AND SWITZER LAND CHIEFLY.
Translated from the Fourth Revised Edition of the German by EVELINA
MOORE. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

Hall (Rev. Newman, LL.B.)— THE LORD'S PRAYER : A Practical

Meditation. Svo, 10s. 6d.

Earless (Dr. C. A.)— SYSTEM OF CHRISTIAN ETHICS. Svo, 10s. Gd. Harris
(Rev. Samuel, D.D.)— THE PHILOSOPHICAL BASIS OF THEISM :

An Examination of the Personality of Man to ascertain his Capacity to
Know and Serve God, and the Validity of the Principles underlying the
Defence of Theism. Ex. Svo, 12s.

Haupt (Erich)— THE FIRST EPISTLE OF ST. JOHN. A Contribution

to Biblical Theology. Svo, 10s. 6d.

Havernick (H. A. Ch.)— INTRODUCTION TO OLD TESTAMENT. 10s. Gd. Heard
(Rev. J. B., M.A.)— THE TRIPARTITE NATURE OF MAN — SPIRIT.

SOUL, AND BODY —applied to Illustrate and Explain the Doctrine of
Original Sin, the New Birth, the Disembodied State, and the Spiritual
Body. With an Appendix on the Fatherhood of God. Fifth Edition, crown
Svo, 6s.

Hefele (Bishop)—A HISTORY OF THE COUNCILS OF THE CHURCH.

Vol. I., to A.D. 325 ; Vol. II., A.D. 326 to 429. Vol. III., A.D. 431 to
the close of the Council of Chalcedon, 451. Svo, 12s. each. Hengstenberg
(Professor)— COMMENTARY ON PSALMS. 3 vols. Svo, 33s.

T. and T. Clark's Publications.

Hengstenberg (Professor)— COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF ECCLESI-

ASTES. To which are appended : Treatises on the Song of Solomon ; on the
Book of Job ; on the Prophet Isaiah, etc. 8vo, 9s.

THE PROPHECIES or THE PROPHET EZEKIEL ELUCIDATED.

8vo, 10s. 6d.

DISSERTATIONS ON THE GENUINENESS OF DANIEL, AND THE

INTEGRITY OF ZECHAKIAH. Svo, 12s.

HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD UNDER THE OLD TESTA MENT. Two vols. Svo,
21s.

CHRISTOLOGY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT : A Commentary on

the Messianic Predictions. Second Edition, Four vols. 8vo, £2, 2s.

ON THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

Hermes Trismegistus— THEOLOGICAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL WORKS.

Translated from the original Greek by J. D. CHAMBERS, M. A. Svo, 6s.

Herzog— ENCYCLOPAEDIA OR DICTIONARY OF BIBLICAL, HISTORICAL,

DOCTRINAL, AND PRACTICAL THEOLOGY. Based on the Real-Encyklopadie of
Herzog, Plitt, and Hauck. Edited by Professor SCIIAFF, D.D. In Three
vols., price 24s. each.

Hutchison (John, D.D.)— COMMENTARY ON THESSALONIANS. Svo, 9s.

Janet (Paul)— FINAL CAUSES. By PAUL JANET, Member of the In stitute.
Translated from the French by "W. AFFLECK, B.D. Second Edition. Demy
Svo, 12s.

THE THEORY OF MORALS. Translated from the latest French

Edition. Demy Svo, 10s. Cd. Shortly.

Jouffroy— PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAYS. Fcap. Svo, 5s.

Kant— THE METAPHYSIC OF ETHICS. Crown Svo, 6s.

Keil (Professor)— BIBLICAL COMMENTARY ON THE PENTATEUCH. Three

vols. Svo, 31s. 6d.

COMMENTARY ON THE BOOKS OF JOSHUA, JUDGES, AND RUTH.

8vo, 10s. 6d.

COMMENTARY ON THE BOOKS OF SAMUEL. Svo, 10s. 6d.

COMMENTARY ON THE BOOKS OF KINGS. Svo, 10s. 6d.

COMMENTARY ON THE BOOKS OF CHRONICLES. Svo, 10s. 6d.

COMMENTARY ON EZRA, NEHEMIAH, ESTHER. Svo, 10s. Cd.

COMMENTARY ON JEREMIAH. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

COMMENTARY ON EZEKIEL. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

COMMENTARY ON DANIEL. Svo, 10s. 6d.

ON THE BOOKS OF THE MlNOR PROPHETS. Two Vols. Svo, 21s.

MANUAL OF HISTORICO - CRITICAL INTRODUCTION TO THE

CANONICAL SCRIPTURES OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. Two vols. Svo, 21s. Keymer
(Rev. K, M.A.)— NOTES ON GENESIS; or, Christ and His

Church among the Patriarchs. With a Preliminary Notice by the Bishop of
Lincoln. Crown Svo, Is. 6d.

Killen (Prof.)— THE OLD CATHOLIC CHURCH ; or, The History, Doc trine,
Worship, and Polity of the Christians, traced from the Apostolic Age to
the Establishment of the Pope as a Temporal Sovereign, A.D. 755. Svo,
9s.

Krummacher (Dr. F. W.)— THE SUFFERING SAVIOUR ; or, Meditations

on the Last Days of the Sufferings of Christ. Eighth Edit., crown Svo,
7s. 6d.

DAVID, THE KING OF ISRAEL : A Portrait drawn from Bible

History and the Book of Psalms. Second Edition, crown Svo, 7s. 6d.

T. and T. Clark's Publications.

Krummacher (Dr. F. W.)— AUTOBIOGRAPHY. Edited by his Daughter.

Crown Svo, 6s.

Kurtz (Prof.)— HANDBOOK OF CHURCH HISTORY. Two vols. Svo, 15s.

HISTORY OF THE OLD COVENANT. Three vols. Svo, 31s. 6d.

Ladd (Prof. G-. T.)— THE DOCTRINE OF SACRED SCRIPTURE : A

Critical, Historical, and Dogmatic Inquiry into the Origin and Nature of
the Old and New Testaments. Two vols., extra demy, 28s.

Laidlaw (Rev. Prof. John, D.D.)— THE BIBLE DOCTRINE OF MAN.

frhe Seventh Series of Cunningham Lectures.) Svo, 10s. 6d.

Lange (J. P., D.D.)— THE LIFE OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST. Edited,

with additional Notes, by MARCUS DODS, D.D. Second Edition, in Four
vols. Svo, Subscription price, 28s.

COMMENTARIES ON THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT. Edited

by PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D. OLD TESTAMENT, 14 vols. ; NEW TESTAMENT, 10 vols.
; APOCRYPHA, 1 vol. Subscription price, nctt, 15s. each.

Lange (J. P., D.D.)— COMMENTARY, THEOLOGICAL AND HOMILETICAL, ON THE
GOSPELS OF ST. MATTHEW AND ST. MARK. Three vols. Svo, 31s. 6d.

ON THE GOSPEL OF ST. LUKE. Two vols. Svo, 18s.

ON THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

ON THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

Lewis (Tayler, LL.D.)— THE Six DAYS OF CREATION. New Edition,

crown Svo, 7s. Cd.

Lindsay (Rev. Prof., D.D.)— THE REFORMATION. BiUe Clans Hand books.
Crown Svo, 2s.

THE GOSPEL OF ST. MARK. Lille Class Handbooks. Cr. Svo, 2s. Gd.

Lisco (F. G.)— PARABLES OF JESUS EXPLAINED. Fcnp. Svo, 5s.

Lotze (Professor)— MICROCOSMOS. In 'preparation.

Luthardt, Kahnis, and Bruckner— THE CHURCH : Its Origin, its

History, and its Present Position. Crown Svo, 5s.

Luthardt (Prof.)— ST. JOHN THE AUTHOR OF THE FOURTH GOSPEL. 9s.

ST. JOHN'S GOSPEL DESCRIBED AND EXPLAINED ACCORDING

TO ITS PECULIAR CHARACTER. Three vols. Svo, 31s. 6d.

APOLOGETIC LECTURES ON THE FUNDAMENTAL (Sixth

Edition), SAVING (Fourth Edition), MORAL TRUTHS OF CHRISTIANITY (Third
Edition). Three vols. crown Svo, 6s. each.

Macdonald (Rev. Donald)— INTRODUCTION TO THE PENTATEUCH : An

Inquiry, Critical and Doctrinal, into the Genuineness, Authority, and
Design of the Mosaic Writings. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

THE CREATION AND FALL. Svo, 12s.

Macgregor (Rev. Jas., D.D.)— THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS. With

Introduction and Notes. Bible Class Handbook\*. Crown Svo, Is. 6d.

Macpherson (Rev. John, M.A.)— THE WESTMINSTER CONFESSION OF

FAITH. With Introduction and Notes. Bible Class Handbooks. Cr. Svo, 2s.

PRESBYTERIANISM. Bible Class Handbooks. Crown Svo, Is. 6d.

M'Lauchlan (T., D.D., LL.D.)— THE EARLY SCOTTISH CHURCH. To

the Middle of the Twelfth Century. Svo, 10s. 6d.

Mair (Alexander, D.D.)— STUDIES IN THE CHRISTIAN EVIDENCES.

Crown Svo, 6s.

Martensen (Bishop)— CHRISTIAN DOGMATICS : A Compendium of the

Doctrines of Christianity. Svo, 1 Os. 6d.

CHRISTIAN ETHICS. (GENERAL ETHICS.) Svo, 10s. 6d.

CHRISTIAN ETHICS. (INDIVIDUAL ETHICS.) Svo, 10s. 6d.

CHRISTIAN ETHICS. (SOCIAL ETHICS.) Svo, 10s. 6d.

T. and T. Clark's Publications.

Matheson (Geo., D.D.)— GROWTH OF THE SPIRIT OF CHRISTIANITY, from

the First Century to the Dawn of the Lutheran Era. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.

AIDS TO THE STUDY OF GERMAN THEOLOGY. 3d Edition, 4s. 6d.

Meyer (Dr.) — CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL COMMENTARY ON ST.

MATTHEW'S GOSPEL. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.

ON MARK AND LUKE. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.

ON ST. JOHN'S GOSPEL. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.

ON ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

ON CORINTHIANS. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

ON GALATIANS. Svo, 10s. 6d.

ON EPHESIANS AND PHILEMON. One vol. Svo, 10s. 6d.

ON PHILIPPIANS AND COLOSSIANS. One vol. Svo, 10s. 6d.

ON THESSALONIANS. (Dr. Lunemann.) One vol. Svo, 10s. 6d.

THE PASTORAL EPISTLES. (Dr. Huther.) One vol. Svo,

10s. 6d.

THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. (Dr. Lunemann.) Svo, 10s. Gd. ON ST. JAMES'
AND ST. JOHN'S EPISTLES. (Dr. Huther.) Svo,

10s. 6d.

PETER AND JUDE. (Dr. Huther.) One vol. Svo, 10s. 6d.

Monrad (Dr. D. G.)— THE WORLD OF PRAYER ; or, Prayer in relation

to Personal Keligion. Crown Svo, 4s. 6d.

Morgan (J., D.D.)— SCRIPTURE TESTIMONY TO THE HOLY SPIRIT. 9s.

EXPOSITION OF THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. Svo, 9s.

Miiller (Dr. Julius)— THE CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE OF SIN. An entirely

New Translation from the Fifth German Edition. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.

Murphy (Professor)—A CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL COMMENTARY ON

THE BOOK OF PSALMS. Svo, 12s. BOOKS OF CHRONICLES. Bible Class
Handbooks. Cr. Svo, Is. 6d.

A CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL COMMENTARY ON EXODUS. 9s.

Naville (Ernest)— THE PROBLEM OF EVIL. Crown Svo, 4s. 6d.

THE CHRIST. Translated by Rev. T. J. DESPRES. Cr. Svo, 4s. 6d.

MODERN PHYSICS : Studies Historical and Philosophical.

Translated by Rev. HENRY DOWNTON, M.A. Crown Svo, 5s.

Nicoll (W. E., M.A.)— THE INCARNATE SAVIOUR: A Life of Jesus

Christ. Crown Svo, 6s.

Neander (Dr.)— GENERAL HISTORY OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION AND

CHTTRCH. Nine vols. Svo, £3, 7s. 6d.

Oehler (Prof.)— THEOLOGY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 2 vols. Svo, 21s.
Oosterzee (Dr. Van)— THE YEAR OF SALVATION. Words of Life for Every Day.
A Book of Household Devotion. Two vols. £vo, 7s. 6d. each.

MOSES : A Biblical Study. Crown Svo, 6s.

Olshausen (Dr. H.)— BIBLICAL COMMENTARY ON THE GOSPELS AND

ACTS. Four vols. Svo, £2, 2s. Cheaper Edition, four vols. crown Svo,
24s.

ROMANS. One vol. Svo, 10s. 6d.

CORINTHIANS. One vol. Svo, 9s.

PHILIPPIANS, TITUS, AND FIRST TIMOTHY. One vol. Svo, 10s. 6d.

Owen (Dr. John)—- WORKS. Best and only Complete Edition. Edited

by Rev. Dr. GOOLD. Twenty-four vols. Svo, Subscription price, £4, 4s.
The 'Hebrews' may be had separately, in Seven vols., £2, 2s. nett.

Philippi (F. A.)— COMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS. From

the Third Improved Edition, by Rev. Professor BANKS. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

Piper (Dr. Ferdinand)— LIVES OF THE LEADERS OF THE CHURCH

UNIVERSAL. Translated from the German, and edited, with, additions, by
H. M. MACCRACKEN, JD.D. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

Popular Commentary on the New Testament. Edited by PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D.
With Illustrations and Maps. Vol. I.— THE SYNOPTICAL GOSPELS. Vol. II.—
ST. JOHN'S GOSPEL, AND THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. Vol. III.— ROMANS TO
PHILEMON. Vol. IV.— HEBREWS TO REVELATION. In Four vols. imperial Svo,
18s. each.

Pressense' (Edward de)— THE REDEEMER : Discourses Translated from

the French. Crown Svo, 6s.

Rainy (Principal) — DELIVERY AND DEVELOPMENT OF CHRISTIAN

DOCTRINE. (The Fifth Series of the Cunningham Lectures.) 8vo, 10s. 6d.
Reusch (Professor)— BIBLE AND NATURE. In preparation. Reuss (Professor)—
HISTORY OF THE SACRED SCRIPTURES OF THE NEW

TESTAMENT. In preparation.

Riehm (Dr. E.)— MESSIANIC PROPHECY: Its Origin, Historical Charac ter,
and Relation to New Testament Fulfilment. Crown Svo, 5s.

Ritter (Carl)— THE COMPARATIVE GEOGRAPHY OF PALESTINE AND THE

SINAITIC PENINSULA. Four vols. Svo, 32s.

Robinson (Rev. S., D.D.)— DISCOURSES ON REDEMPTION. Svo, 7s. Gel.

Robinson (Edward, D.D.)— GREEK AND ENGLISH LEXICON OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.
Svo, 9s.

Rothe (Professor)— SERMONS FOR THE CHRISTIAN YEAR. O. Svo, 6s.

Saisset— MANUAL OF MODERN PANTHEISM : Essay on Religious Philo sophy.
Two vols. Svo, 10s. 6d.

Schaff (Professor)— HISTORY OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH. (New

Edition, thoroughly Revised and Enlarged.)

• APOSTOLIC CHRISTIANITY, A.D. 1-100. In Two Divisions.

Ex. Svo, 21s.

• ANTE-NICENE CHRISTIANITY, A.D. 100-325. In Two Divisions.

Ex. Svo, 21s.

POST-NICENE CHRISTIANITY, A.D. 325-GOO. In Two Divisions.

Ex. Svo, 21s.

Schmid's BIBLICAL THEOLOGY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. Svo, 10s. 6d. Scott
(Jas., M.A., D.D.)— PRINCIPLES OF NEW TESTAMENT QUOTATION

ESTABLISHED AND APPLIED TO BIBLICAL CRITICISM. Cr. Svo, 2nd Edit., 4s.
Scrymgeour (Wm., M.A.)— LESSONS ON THE LIFE OF CHRIST. Bible-Class
Handbooks. Crown Svo, 2s. 6d.

Shedd (W., D.D.)— HISTORY OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. Two vols.

Svo, 21s.

SERMONS TO THE NATURAL MAN. Svo, 7s. 6d.

Smeaton (Professor)— THE DOCTRINE OF THE ATONEMENT AS TAUGHT

BY CHRIST HIMSELF. Second Edition, Svo, 10s. 6d.

ON THE . DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. (Ninth Series of

Cunningham Lectures.) Svo, 10s. 6d. Smith (H. B., D.D.)— FAITH AND
PHILOSOPHY : Discourses and Essays.

Edited, with an Introductory Notice, by G. L. PRENTISS, D.D. Svo, 12s.

Smith (Professor Thos., D.D.)— MEDI.EVAL MISSIONS. (Duff Missionary

Lectures, First Series.) Crown Svo, 4s. 6d.

Stalker (Jas., M.A.)—A LIFE OF CHRIST. Bible Class Handbooks.

Crown Svo, Is. Gd.

Steinmeyer (Dr. F. L.)— THE MIRACLES OF OUR LORD : Examined in

their relation to Modern Criticism. Svo, 7s. 6d.

• THE HISTORY OF THE PASSION AND RESURRECTION OF OUR

LORD, considered in the Light of Modern Criticism. Svo, 10s. 6d.

T. and T. Clark's Publications.

Stevenson (Mrs.)— THE SYMBOLIC PARABLES : The Predictions of the

Apocalypse viewed in relation to the GeneralTruths of Scripture. Crown
8vo, 5s.

Steward (Rev. G.)— MEDIATORIAL SOVEREIGNTY : The Mystery of Christ

and the Revelation of the Old and New Testaments. Two vols. 8vo, 21s.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. A

Posthumous Work. 8vo, 10s. 6d.

Stier (Dr. Eudolph)— ON THE WORDS OF THE LORD JESUS. Eight

vols. 8vo, £4, 4s. Separate volumes may be had, price 10s. 6d. In order
to bring this valuable Work more ivithin the reach of all Classes, both
Clergy and Laity, Messrs. Clark continue to supply the Eight-volume,
Edition bound in FOUR at the Original Subscription price of £2, 2s.

THE WORDS OF THE KISEN SAVIOUR, AND COMMENTARY ON

THE EPISTLE OF ST. JAMES. 8vo, 10s. 6d.

THE WORDS OF THE APOSTLES EXPOUNDED. 8vo, 10s. 6d.

Tholuck (Professor)— COMMENTARY ON GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN. 8vo, 9s.

THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS. Two vols. fcap. 8vo, 8s.

LIGHT FROM THE CROSS : Sermons on the Passion of Our

Lord. Third Edition, crown Svo, 5s.

COMMENTARY ON THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT. Svo, 10s. 6d.

Tophel (Pastor G-.)— THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. Translated by

Rev. T. J. DESPR\^S. Crown Svo, 2s. 6d.

Uhlhorn (G-.)— CHRISTIAN CHARITY IN THE ANCIENT CHURCH. Crown

Svo, 6s.

Ullmann (Dr. Carl)— REFORMERS BEFORE THE REFORMATION, princi pally in
Germany and the Netherlands. Two vols. Svo, 21s.

THE SINLESSNESS OF JESUS : An Evidence for Christianity.

Fourth Edition, crown Svo, 6s.

TJrwiek (W., M.A.)— THE SERVANT OF JEHOVAH : A Commentary

upon Isaiah lii. 13-liii. 12; with Dissertations upon Isaiah xl.-lxvi.
Svo, 6s.

Vinet (Professor)— STUDIES ON BLAISE PASCAL. Crown Svo, 5s.

PASTORAL THEOLOGY. Second Edition, post Svo, 3s. 6d.

Walker (Rev. Norman L.)— SCOTTISH CHURCH HISTORY. Bible Class

Handbooks. Crown Svo, Is. 6d.

Watts (Professor)— THE NEWER CRITICISM AND THE ANALOGY OF

THE FAITH. A Reply to Lectures by "VV. Robertson Smith, M.A., on the Old
Testament in the Jewish Church. Third Edition, crown Svo, 5s.

Weiss (Prof. Bernhard)— BIBLICAL THEOLOGY OF THE NEW TESTA MENT. Two
vols. Svo, 21s.

LIFE OF CHRIST. Three vols. Svo, 31s. 6d. Vol. III. in Press.

White (Rev. M.)— THE SYMBOLICAL NUMBERS OF SCRIPTURE. Crown

Svo, 4s. Whyte (Alexander, D.D.)— THE SHORTER CATECHISM. Bible Class

Handbooks. Crown Svo, 2s. 6d.

Williams (W. H., M.A.)—A SELECT VOCABULARY OF LATIN ETYMOLOGY.

For the use of Schools. Fcap. Svo, Is. 6d.

— OVID'S PONTIC EPISTLES. With Notes for Schools. In the Press. Winer
(Dr. G-. B.)—A TREATISE ON THE GRAMMAR OF NEW TESTA MENT GREEK, regarded
as the Basis of New Testament Exegesis. Third Edition, edited by W. F.
MOULTON, D.D. Ninth English Edition, Svo, 15s.

A COMPARATIVE VIEW OF THE DOCTRINES AND CONFESSIONS

OF THE VARIOUS COMMUNITIES OF CHRISTENDOM. Svo, 10s. 6d. Wuttke
(Professor)— CHRISTIAN ETHICS. Two vols. Svo, 12s. 6d.

T. and T. Clark's Publications.

NEW SERIES

OF THE

FOREIGN THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY,

The First Issue for 1884 will comprise — WEISS ON THE LIFE OF CHRIST.
Vol. III. (completion). SARTORIUS ON THE DOCTRINE OF DIVINE LOVE. One
Vol.

1SSQ.— GODET'S COMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE

ROMANS. Vol. I.

HAGENBACH'S HISTORY OF DOCTRINES. Vols. I. and II. DORNER'S SYSTEM OF
CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. VoL I.

1881.— GODET'S COMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLE OF ST. PAUL TO THE

ROMANS. Vol. II.

DORNER'S SYSTEM OF CHP.ISTIAN DOCTRINE. Vol. II. MARTENSEN'S CHRISTIAN
ETHICS. (Individual Etnics.) HAGENBACE'S HISTORY OF DOCTRINES. Vol. III.
(completion).

18S2.— DORNER'S SYSTEM OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. Vols. III. and IV.

(completion).

WEISS'S BIBLICAL THEOLOGY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. Vol. I. MARTENSEH'S
CHRISTIAN ETHICS. (Social Etnics.)

1883.— WEISS ON THE LIFE OF CHRIST. Vols. I. and II.

WEISS ON BIBLICAL THEOLOGY OF NEW TESTAMENT. Vol. II. (com pletion).
GOEBEL ON THE PARABLES. One Vol.

The FOREIGN THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY was commenced in 1846, and from that
time to this Four Volumes yearly (or about 160 in all) have appeared
with the utmost regularity.

The Publishers decided to begin a NEW SERIES with 1880, and so give an
opportunity to many to subscribe who are possibly deterred by the extent
of the former Series.

The Publishers are sanguine enough to believe that a Series containing
the works of writers so eminent, upon the most important subjects,
cannot fail to secure support.

The Binding of the Series is modernized, so as to distinguish it from
the former Series.

The Subscription Price will remain as formerly, 2is. annually for Four
Volumes, payable in advance.

A SELECTION OF TWENTY VOLUMES

FOR FIVE GUINEAS

(OK MOKE AT SAME RATIO)

May be had from the Volumes issued previously to New Series, viz. Works
mentioned on tliree succeeding pages.

FOREIGN THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY,

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION: One Guinea for Four Volumes, Demy 8vo.

N.B. —Any two Tears in this Series can be had at Subscription Price. A
single Tear's Books (except in the case of the current Year) cannot be
supplied separately. Non-subscribers, price 10s. 6d. each volume, with
exceptions marked.

186 4—Lange on the Acts of the Apostles. Two Volumes.

Keil and Delitzsch on the Pentateuch. Vols. I. and II. 1 8 6 5 — K eil
and Delitzsch on the Pentateuch. Vol. III.

Hengstenberg on the Gospel of John. Two Volumes.

Keil and Delitzsch on Joshua, Judges, and Ruth. One Volume.

1866 — Keil and Delitzsch on Samuel. One Volume.

Keil and Delitzsch on Job. Two Volumes.

Martensen's System of Christian Doctrine. One Volume.

1867 — Delitzsch on Isaiah. Two Volumes.

Delitzsch on Biblical Psychology. (12s.) One Volume. Auberlen on Divine
Sevelation. One Volume.

186 8—Keil's Commentary on the Minor Prophets. Two Volumes.

Delitzsch's Commentary on Epistle to the Hebrews. Vol. I. Harless'
System of Christian Ethics. One Volume. 1869 — Hengstenberg on Ezekiel.
One Volume.

Stier on the Words of the Apostles. One Volume. Keil's Introduction to
the Old Testament. Vol. I. Bleek's Introduction to the New Testament.
Vol. I.

187 0 — Kei l'8 Introduction to the Old Testament. Vol. II.

Bleek's Introduction to the New Testament. Vol. II.

Schmid's New Testament Theology. One .Volume.

Delitzsch's Commentary on Epistle to the Hebrews. Vol. II. 1871
—Delitzsch's Commentary on the Psalms. Three Volumes.

Hengstenberg's Kingdom of God under the Old Testament. Vol. I. 187 2 —
Keil's Commentary on the Books of Kings. One Volume.

Keil's Commentary on the Book of Daniel. One Volume.

Keil's Commentary on the Books of Chronicles. One Volume.

Hengstenberg's History of the Kingdom of God. Vol. II. 1873 — Keil's
Commentary on Ezra, Neliemiah, and Esther. One Volume.

Winer's Collection of the Confessions of Christendom. One Volume.

Keil's Commentary on Jeremiah. Vol. I.

Martensen on Christian Ethics. 187 4—Christlieb's Modern Doubt and
Christian Belief. One Vol.

Keil's Commentary on Jeremiah. Vol. II.

Delitzsch's Commentary on Proverbs. Vol. I.

Oehler's Biblical Theology of the Old Testament. VoL I. "j 8 7 5—Godot's
Commentary on St. Luke's Gospel. Two Volumes.

Oehler's Biblical Theology of the Old Testament. Vol. II.

Delitzsch's Commentary on Proverbs. Vol. II. 1 8 7 6 — Keil's Commentary
on Ezekiel. Two Volumes.

Luthardt's Commentary on St. John's Gospel. VoL I.

Godet's Commentary on St. John's Gospel. Vol. I.

1877 — Delitzsch's Commentary on Song of Solomon and Ecclesiastes.

Godet's Commentary on St. John's Gospel. Vols. II. and III. Luthardt's
Commentary on St. John's Gospel. VoL II.

1878 — Gebhardt's Doctrine of the Apocalypse.

Luthardt's Commentary on St. John's Gospel. Vol. III. Philippi's
Commentary on the Romans. Vol. I. Hagenbach's History of the
Reformation. Vol. I. 187 9—Philippi's Commentary on the Romans. Vol. II.
Hagenbach's History of the Reformation. Vol. II. Steinmeyer's History of
the Passion and Resurrection of our Lord. Haupt's Commentary on the
First Epistle of St. John. One Volume. \*„\* For New Series commencing
with 1880, see previous page.

T. and T. Clark's Publications.

MESSRS. CLARK allow a SELECTION of TWENTY VOLUMES (or more at the same
ratio) from the Volumes issued previously to New Series (see below'),

At the Subscription Price of Five Guineas.

NON-SUBSCRIPTION PRICES WITHIN BRACKETS.

Dr. Hengstenberg.—Commentary on the Psalms. By E. W. HENGSTENBERG, D.
D., Professor of Theology ill Berlin. In Three Vols. 8vo. (33s.)

Dr. Qieseler.—Compendium of Ecclesiastical History. By J. C. L.
GIESELER, D.D., Professor of Theology in Giittingen; Five Vols. 8vo.
(£2, 12s. 6d.)

Dr. Olshausen.—Biblical Commentary on the Gospels and Acts. Adapted
especially for Preachers and Students. By HERMANN OLSHAUSKN, D.D.,
Professor of Theology in the University of Erlangen. In Four Vols. 8vo.
(£2, 2s.)—Com mentary on the Romans. In One vol. 8vo. (10s. 6d.) —
Commentary on St. Paul's First and Second Epistles to the Corinthians.
In One Vol. 8vo. (9s.) —Commentary on St. Paul's Epistles to the
Philippians, to Titus, and the First to Timothy. In continuation of the
Work of Olshausen. By Lie. AUGUST WIESINGER. In One Vol. 8vo. (10s. 6d.)

Dr. Neander.—General History of the Christian Religion and Church. By
AUGUSTUS NEANUER, D.D. Nine Vols. 8vo. (£3, 7s. 6d.)

Prof. H. A. Ch. Havernick.—General Introduction to the Old Testament. By
Professor HAVERNICK. One Vol. 8vo. (10s. 6d.)

Dr. Muller.—The Christian Doctrine of Sin. By Dr. JULIUS MULLER. Two
Vols. 8vo. (21s.) New Edition.

Dr. Hengstenberg.—Christology of the Old Testament, and a Commentary on
the Messianic Predictions. By E. W. HEXGSTENBERG, D.D. Four Vols. (£2,
2s.)

Dr. M. Baumgarten.—The Acts of the Apostles; or, The History of the
Chnrch in the Apostolic Age. By M. BAUMGARTEN, Ph.D. Three Vols. (£1,
7s.)

Dr. Stier.—The Words of the Lord Jesus. By RUDOLPH STIER, D.D., Chief
Pastor and Superintendent of Schkeuditz. In Eight Vols. 8vo. (£4, 4s.)

Dr. Carl Ullmann.—Reformers before the Reformation, principally in
Germany and the Netherlands. Two Vols. 8vo. (£1, Is.)

Professor Kurtz.—History of the Old Covenant; or, Old Testament
Dispensation. By Professor KURTZ of Dorpat. In Three Vols. (£1, 11s.
fid.)

Dr. Stier.—The Words of the Risen Saviour, and Commentary on the Epistle
of St. James. By RUDOLPH STIER, D.D. One Vol. (10s. 6d.)

Professor Tholuck.—Commentary on the Gospel of St. John. One Vol. (9s.)

Professor Tholuck.—Commentary on the Sermon on the Mount. One Vol. (10s.
6d.)

Dr. Hengstenberg On the Book of Ecclesiastes. To which are appended:
Treatises

on the Song of Solomon ; the Book of Job ; the Prophet Isaiah; the
Sacrifices of Holy Scripture; and on the Jews and the Christian Church.
In One Vol. 8vo. (9s.)

Dr. Ebrard.—Commentary on the Epistles of St. John. By Dr. JOHN H. A.

KHKAKII, Professor of Theology. lu One Vol. (10s. 6d.) Dr.
Lange.—Theological and Homiletical Commentary on the Gospels of St.

Matthew and Mark. By J. P. LANGE, D.D. Three Vols. (10s. 6d. each.) Dr.
Dorner.—History of the Development of the Doctrine of the Person of
Christ.

By Dr. J. A. DORNEII, Professor of Theology in the University of Berlin.

Five Vols. (£2, 12s. 6d.) Lange and Dr. J. J. Van Oosterzee.—Theological
and Homiletical Commentary on

the Gospel of St. Luke. Two Vols. (18s.) Dr. Ebrard.—The Gospel History:
A Compendium of Critical Investigations in

support of the Historical Character of the Four Gospels. One Vol. (10s.
6d.) Lange, Lechler, and Gerok.—Theological and Eomiletical Commentary
on the

Acts of the Apostles. Edited by Dr. LANGE. Two Vols. (21s.) Dr.
Hengstenberg.—Commentary on the Gospel of St. John. Two Vols. (21s.)
Professor Keil.—Biblical Commentary on the Pentateuch. Three Vols. (31s.
6d.)

T. and T. Clark's Publications.

CLARK'S FOREIGN THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY— Continued.

Professor Keil.—Commentary on Joshua, Judges, and Ruth. One Vol. (IDs.
6d.)

Professor Delitzsch.—A System of Biblical Psychology. One Vol. (12s.)

Dr. C. A. Auberlen.—The Divine Eevelation. 8vo. (10s. 6d.)

Professor Delitzsch.—Commentary on the Prophecies of Isaiah. Two Vols.
(21s.)

Professor Keil.—Commentary on the Books of Samnel. One Vol. (10s. 6d.)

Professor Delitzsch.—Commentary on the Book of Job. Two Vols. (21s.)

Bishop Martensen.—Christian Dogmatics. A Compendium of the Doctrines of

Christianity. One Vol. (10s. 6d.)

Dr. J. P. Lange.—Commentary on the Gospel of St. John. Two Vols. (21s.)
Professor Keil.—Commentary on the Minor Prophets. Two Vols. (21s.)
Professor Delitzsch.—Commentary on Epistle to the Hebrews. Two Vols.
(21s.) Dr. Earless.—A System of Christian Ethics. Oiie Vol. (10s. 6d.)
Dr. Hengstenberg.-—Commentary on Ezekiel. One Vol. (10s. 6d.) Dr.
Stier.—The Words of the Apostles Expounded. One Vol. (10s. 6d.)
Professor Keil.—Introduction to the Old Testament. Two Vols. (21s.)
Professor Bleek.—Introduction to the New Testament. Two Vols. (21s.)
Professor Schmid.—New Testament Theology. One VoL (10s. 6d.) Professor
Delitzsch.—Commentary on the Psalms. Three Vols. (31s. 6d.) Dr.
Hengstenberg.—The Kingdom of God under the Old Covenant. Two Vols.
(21s.) Professor Keil.—Commentary on the Books of Kings. One Volume.
(10s. 6d.) Professor Keil.—Commentary on the Book of Daniel. One Volume.
(10s. 6d.) Professor Keil.—Commentary on the Books of Chronicles. One
Volume. (10s. 6d.) Professor Keil.—Commentary on Ezra, Nehemiah, and
Esther. One Vol. (10s. 6d.) Professor Keil.—Commentary on Jeremiah. Two
Vols. (21s.) Winer (Dr. G. B.)—Collection of the Confessions of
Christendom. One Vol. (10s.6d.) Bishop Martensen.—Christian Ethics. One
Volume. (10s. 6d.) Professor Delitzsch.—Commentary on the Proverbs of
Solomon. Two Vols. (21s.) Professor Oehler.—Biblical Theology of the Old
Testament. Two Vols. (21s.) Professor Christlieb.—Modern Doubt and
Christian Belief. One Vol. (10s. 6d.) Professor Godet.—Commentary on St.
Luke's Gospel. Two Vols. (21s.) Professor Luthardt.—Commentary on St.
John's Gospel. Three Vols. (31s. 6d.) Professor Godet.—Commentary on St.
John's Gospel. Three Vols. (31s. 6d.) Professor Keil.—Commentary on
Ezekiel. Two Vols. (21s.) Professor Delitzsch.—Commentary on Song of
Solomon and Ecclesiastes. One

Vol. (10s. 6d.)

Gebhardt (H.)— Doctrine of the Apocalypse. One Vol. (10s. 6cl.)
Steinmeyer (Dr. F. L.)—History of the Passion and Resurrection of our
Lord.

One Vol. (10s. 6d.)

Haupt (E.)—Commentary on the First Epistle of St. John. One Vol. (10s.
6d.) Hagenbach (Dr. K. R.)—History of the Reformation. Two Vols. (21s.)
Philippi (Dr. F. A.)—Commentary on Romans. Two Vols. (21s.)

And, in connection with the Series —

Murphy's Commentary on the Book of Psalms. To count as Two Volumes.
(12s.) Alexander's Commentary on Isaiah. Two Volumes. (17s.) Ritter's
(Carl) Comparative Geography of Palestine. Four Volumes. (32s.) Shedd's
History of Christian Doctrine. Two Volumes. (21s.) Macdonald's
Introduction to the Pentateuch. Two Volumes. (21s.) Gerlach's Commentary
on the Pentateuch. 8vo. (10s. 6d.) Dr. Hengstenberg. —dissertations on
the Genuineness of Daniel, etc. One Vol. (12s,)

The series, in 159 Volumes (including 1883), price £41, 14s. 9d., forms
an Apparatus without which it may be truly said no Theological Library
can be complete; and the Publishers take the liberty of suggesting that
no more appropriate gift could be presented to a Clergyman than the
Series, in whole or in part.

\* »\* No DUPLICATES can be included in the Selection of Twenty Volumes;
and it will save trouble and correspondence if it be distinctly
understood that NO LESS number than Twenty can be supplied, unless at
non-subscription price.

Subscribers' Names received by all Retail Booksellers.

LONDON : (For Works at Non-subscription price only} HAMILTON, ADAMS, &
Co.

\~ QH 1 n

"\<w ' \^J

T. and T. Claries Publications.

LANGE'S COMMENTARIES.

(Subscription price, nett\~), 15s. each.

THEOLOGICAL AND HOMILETIGAL COMMENTARY ON THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS.

Specially designed and adapted for the use of Ministers and Students. By
Prof. JOHN PETEU LANGE, D.D., in connection with a number of eminent
European Divines. Translated, enlarged, and revised under the general
editorship of Rev. Dr. PHILIP SCUAFF, assisted by leading Divines of the
various Evangelical Denominations.

OLD TESTAMENT—14 VOLUMES.

I. GENESIS. With a General Introduction to the Old Testament. By Prof.
J. P. LARGE, D.D. Translated from the German, with Additions, by Prof.
TATLEK LEWIS. LL.D., and A. GOSMAN, D.D. II. EXODUS :ind LEVITICUS. By
J. P. LANGK, D.D. With General Introduction by Rev. Dr. Osooon.— III.
NUMBERS. By Prof. J. P. LANGK, D.D. DEUTERONOMY. By W. J. SCHROEDER.
—IV. JOSHUA. I!y Kev. F. R. FAY. JUDGES and RUTH. By Prof. PAULUS
CASSELL, D.D.—V. SAMUEL. By Professor ERDMANN, D.D.—VI. KINGS. By KARL
CIIR. \\V. F BAUR, D.D.—VII CHRONICLES. By OrroZocKLER. EZRA. By FK.
W.SCHULTZ. NEHEMIAH. By Rev. HOWAUD CR.JSBF, D D., LL.D. ESTHER. By FR.
W. SCHDLTZ.— VIII. JOB. With an Introduction and Annotations by Prof.
TAYLER LKWIS, LL.D. A Commentary by Dr. OTTO ZOCKLKR. together with iin
Introductory Essay on Hebrew Poetry by Prof. PHILIP SCHAFF, D.I).—IX.
THE PSALMS. By C. B. MOLL, D.D.—X PROVERBS, ECCLESIASTES, and THE SONG
OF SOLOMON. Bv Prof. O. ZOCKLEK, D.D.—XI. ISAIAH. By C. W. E.
NAKGEI.SBACU.— XII. JEREMIAH and LAMENTA TIONS. By C. W.E. NAKGELSBACH,
D.D.- XIII. EZEKIEL. By F. W. SCHRODLR, D.D. DANIEL. By Professor
ZOCKI.KR, D.D.—XIV. THE MINOR PROPHETS." HOSEA. JOEL, and AMOS. By OTTO
SCHMOLLF.R, Ph.D. OBADIAH, MICAH, JONAH, NAEUM, HABAKKUK, and ZEPHANIAH.
By Rev. PAUL KLEINKRT. HAGGAI. By Rev. JAMES E. M'CcuDi. ZECHARIAH. By
T. W. CHAM BERS, D.D. MALACHI. By JOSEPH PACKARD, D.D.

THE APOCRYPHA. \^By\^E." C. BISSELL, D.D. One Volume.

NEW TESTAMENT—10 VOLUMES.

I. MATTHEW. With a General Introduction to the New Testaiv.e:.t. By J.
P. LANGE, D.D Translated, with Additions, by PHILIP SCFIAFF. D.D—II.
MARK. By J. P. LANGE. D.D. LUKE.. By J. J. VAN OOSTERZEE.— III. JOHN. By
J. P. LANGK, D.D.—IV.' ACTS. By G. V. LECHI.KR. D.D., and Rev CHARLES
GEROK.— V. ROMANS. By J. P. LANGE, D.U., and Rev. F. H. FAY.— VI.
CORINTHIANS. By CHRISTIAN F. KLIKG. VII. GALATIANS. By OTTO SCHMOLLF.R,
Ph.I'. EPHESIANS, COLOSSIANS, and PHILIPPIANS. by KARL BRAIINE,
D.D.—VIII. THESSA-LONIANS. By Drs. AUBERLEN and RIGGENBACH. TIMOTHY,
TITUS, and PHILEMON. By J. J. VAN OOSTEKZF.K, D.D. HEBREWS. Bv KARL B.
MOLL. D.D.—IX. JAMES. By J. P. LANGE. D.D.. and J. J. VAN OOSTERZEI:,
D.D. PETER and JUDE. By G. F. C. FRONMCLLKR, Ph.D. JOHN. By KARL BRAUNE,
D.D.—X. THE REVELATION OF 'JOHN. By Dr. J. P. LAXGK. Together with
double Alphabetical Index to all the Ten Volumes on the New Testament,
by JOHN H. WOOD\*.

PROFESSOR EADIE'S COMMENTARIES.

MESSES. CLARK, with the concurrence of tlie Trustees of the late
FROFKS\*OK EADIE, beg to announce the issue, in Four Volumes 8vo, of the
following Com mentaries :—

GALATIANS. EPHESIANS. PHILIPPIANS. COLOSSIANS.

The Four Volumes will be supplied by Subscription at the price of

TWENTY-FOUR SHILLINGS, or, in separate Volumes, at Ten Shillings and
Sixpence each. They have been carefully Edited by

The Rev. WILLIAM YOUNG, M.A., Glasgow. The value of these Commentaries
is well known. They occupy a first and distinctive place in New
Testament exegetical literature.

Three of these Volumes have been out of print for a considerable time,
and all of them are much in demaud.

DATE DUE
