# Preface

THE following treatise owes its origin to a desire expressed by members of the last Senior Class in Columbia Theological Seminary to hear a discussion of the question whether instrumental music may be legitimately used in the public worship of the Church. Possessed of deep convictions on that subject, the writer could not refuse compliance with such a request, and accordingly delivered a course of lectures to the class. A dear Christian friend, who heard one of these lectures preached as a sermon, suggested the propriety of their being published, and being aware that the writer was not encumbered with a superfluity of this world’s goods, generously tendered the means to render the suggestion practical. Although cautioned that she might make a useless pecuniary sacrifice, as the current of the Church’s views is now set in a direction opposed to the doctrine of the treatise, she insisted upon executing her intention, on the ground that she would contribute to erect a testimony to the truth. Hence the appearance of this little book before the public.

It will, no doubt, be said that the attempt to prove the unjustifiable employment of instrumental music in the public worship of the Church is schismatical, since the practice is now well-nigh universal; that it is trivial, inasmuch as it concerns a mere circumstantial in the services of religion; and that it is useless, as the tendency which is resisted is invincible, and is destined to triumph throughout Protestant Christendom. To all this one answer alone is offered, and it is sufficient, namely: that the attempt is grounded in truth. It involves a contest for a mighty and all-comprehending principle, by opposing one of the special forms in which it is now commonly transcended and violated. It is that principle, emphasized in the following remarks as scriptural and regulative, that lends importance to the discussion, and redeems it from the reproach of being narrow and trifling.

The argument is commended to the consideration of any of God’s people into whose hands it may fall; but it is especially addressed to Presbyterians, to whose venerable standards, as well as directly to the Scriptures, the appeal for proof is taken. They are entreated to read it, and to render judgment according to the evidence submitted. May that Almighty Spirit, whose illumination our divine Lord and Saviour promised to his followers, guide each reader to the truth!

COLUMBIA, S. C.


# THE GENERAL ARGUMENT FROM SCRIPTURE.

Attention, at the outset, is invoked to the considerations which serve to establish the following controlling principle: A divine warrant is necessary for every element of doctrine, government and worship in the church; that is, whatsoever in these spheres is not commanded in the Scriptures, either expressly or by good and necessary consequence from their statements, is forbidden.

1. This principle is deducible by logical inference from the great truth—confessed by Protestants—that the Scriptures are an infallible rule of faith and practice, and therefore supreme, perfect and sufficient for all the needs of the Church. "All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works." This truth operates positively to the inclusion of everything in the doctrine, government and worship of the church which is commanded, explicitly or implicitly, in the Scriptures, and negatively to the exclusion of everything which is not so commanded.

2. This principle of the necessity of a divine warrant for everything in the faith and practice of the church is proved by didactic statements of Scripture.

Num. 15:39, 40: "Remember all the commandments of the Lord and do them; and that ye seek not after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whoring: that ye may remember and do all my commandments, and be holy unto your God." Ex. 25:40: "And look that thou make them after their pattern, which was showed thee in the mount." Heb. 8:5: "Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was admonished of God, when he was about to make the tabernacle: for, See, saith he, that thou make all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the mount." Deut. 4:2: "Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish aught from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God which I command you." Deut. 12:32: "What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it." Prov. 30:5, 6: "Every word of God is pure: he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him. Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar." Isa. 8:20: "To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them." Dan. 2:44: "And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people." Matt. 15:6: "Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition." Matt. 28:19, 20: "Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you." Col. 2:20-23: "Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances, (touch not; taste not; handle not; which are all to perish with the using;) after the commandments and doctrines of men? which things have indeed a shew of wisdom in will-worship, and humility, and neglecting of the body; not in any honor to the satisfying of the flesh." 2 Tim. 3:16, 17: "All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works." Rev. 22:18, 19: "For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book: and if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and out of the things which are written in this book."

These solemn statements and awful warnings teach us the lesson, that to introduce any devices and inventions of our own into the doctrine, government or worship of the church, is to add to the words of God, and to fail in maintaining the principles and truths, or in complying with the institutions and ordinances, delivered to us in the Scriptures, is to take away from the words of God. The Romanists, for example, who hold the doctrine of transubstantiation, and observe the sacrifice of the mass, add to God’s words; and the Quakers, who maintain the co-ordinate authority of immediate revelations of new, original truth with the inspired Oracles, and neglect the observance of the sacraments, both add to and take away from them. And, in like manner, those who import instrumental music into the ordained worship of the New Testament Church transcend the warrant of Scripture, and add to the words which Christ our Lord has commanded.

3. There are concrete instances recorded in the Scriptures which graphically illustrate the same great principle.

(1.) Gen. 4.: Cain and his offering. The brothers, Cain and Abel, had been in childhood beyond all doubt instructed by their parents in the knowledge of the first promise of redemption to be accomplished by atonement. They had, we have every reason to believe, often seen their father offering animal sacrifices in the worship of God. To this mode of worship they had been accustomed. Cain, the type of rationalists and fabricators of rites and ceremonies in the house of the Lord, consulted his own wisdom and taste, and ventured to offer in God’s worship the fruit of the ground—an un-bloody sacrifice; while Abel, conforming to the appointments and prescribed usages in which he had been trained, expressed his faith and obedience by offering a lamb. Abel’s worship was accepted and Cain’s rejected. "And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord. And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. And the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering; but unto Cain and his offering he had not respect." Thus, in the immediate family of Adam, we behold a signal and typical instance of self-assertion and disregard of divine prescriptions in the matter of worship. This was swiftly followed by God’s disapprobation, and then came the development of sin in the atrocious crime of fratricide, and the banishment of the murderer from the communion of his family and the presence of his God.

(2.) Lev. 10:1-3.: Nadab and Abihu. "And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of them his censer, and put fire therein, and put incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the Lord, which he commanded them not.^[That is, which he did not command them.] And there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them, and they died before the Lord. Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is it that the Lord spake, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified. And Aaron held his peace." These young men, as the sons of Israel’s high priest, were legitimately employed in discharging the appointed functions of the sacerdotal office. But they presumed to add to God’s commandments. Exercising their own will in regard to the mode of his worship, they did that which he did not command them, and they were instantly killed for their wicked temerity.

(3.) Num. 16.: Korah, Dathan and Abiram. God had consecrated those descendants of Levi who sprang from Aaron to the priesthood, while the remaining descendants of Levi were set apart to other offices pertaining to the service of the tabernacle. Korah was a Levite, but not a son of Aaron. Dathan and Abiram were not even Levites, but appear to have descended from Reuben. When, therefore, these men, asserting the claim that the whole congregation were entitled to rank with Moses and Aaron, ventured to assume to themselves functions which God had restricted to a certain class, they were overtaken by the swift indignation of Jehovah, and perished in an awful manner. "The ground clave asunder that was under them; and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that appertained unto Korah, and all their goods. They, and all that appertained unto them, went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the congregation."

(4.) Num. 20.: Moses smiting the rock at Kadesh. When, on a previous occasion, the Israelites were suffering from thirst, God commanded Moses to smite the rock at Horeb. This he did, and water gushed forth abundantly. The apostle Paul tells us that that rock typified Christ. The typical teaching furnished by Moses, then, was that from the one death of Christ under the smiting of the law the grace of the Holy Ghost should proceed to satisfy the thirst of the soul. Christ was to be smitten unto death only once. Now again, at Kadesh, the Israelites suffer for want of water. God commands Moses to speak unto the rock. To this explicit command he rashly ventured to add. He spoke to the people, instead of the rock, and he smote the rock and smote it twice. He used his own judgment, asserted his own will, and taught the people falsely. For this sin he and Aaron, who concurred with him in its commission, were excluded from entrance into the promised land. "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Take the rod, and gather thou the assembly together, thou and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye to the rock before their eyes; and it shall give forth his water, and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock: so thou shalt give the congregation and their beasts drink. And Moses took the rod from before the Lord, as he commanded him. And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock, and he said unto them, Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock? And Moses lifted up his hand, and with his rod he smote the rock twice: and the water came out abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also. And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given them."

We have here an inexpressibly affecting instance of the sin and folly of adding human inventions to the ordinances of God’s appointment, of the dreadful results that may follow from what men may conceive slight departures from obedience to the commands of God. Not to speak of Aaron, the accomplished orator, the venerable saint, the first anointed high priest of his people, this incomparable man, Moses, in whom were blended all natural gifts and supernatural graces, the deliverer, the legislator, the historian, the poet, the judge and the commander of Israel, after having brought them out of Egypt, conducted them through the parted waters of the Red Sea, mediated between them and God amidst the terrors of Sinai, led them through the horrors of the waste and howling desert,—this glorious man, now in sight of the Jordan, which like a thread separated them from the long-sought, long-coveted goal of their hearts, is doomed, for one addition to God’s command, which no doubt seemed to him but a slight deviation from his instructions, to die short of the promised land.

(5.) I Sam. 13.: Saul offering a burnt-offering at Gilgal. The king had no command to officiate as priest. Saul added to God’s command and performed a function for which he had no authority. The circumstances seemed to him to justify the act. But he gained the divine disapprobation and lost his kingdom for the blunder. "As for Saul, he was yet in Gilgal, and all the people followed him trembling. And he tarried seven days, according to the set time that Samuel had appointed: but Samuel came not to Gilgal; and the people were scattered from him. And Saul said, Bring hither a burnt-offering to me, and peace-offerings. And he offered the burnt-offering. And it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt-offering, behold, Samuel came; and Saul went out to meet him that he might salute him. And Samuel said, What hast thou done? And Saul said, Because I saw that the people were scattered from me, and that thou camest not within the days appointed, and that the Philistines gathered themselves together at Michmash; therefore said I, The Philistines will come down now upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made supplication unto the Lord: I forced myself therefore, and offered a burnt-offering. And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not kept the commandment of the Lord thy God which he commanded thee: for now would the Lord have established thy kingdom upon Israel forever. But now thy kingdom shall not continue: the Lord hath sought him a man after his own heart, and the Lord hath commanded him to be captain over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the Lord commanded thee."

(6.) I Chron. 13:7, 8; 15:11-15: Uzza and the ark, and David’s subsequent obedience. The Levites, or, more particularly, the Kohathites, were expressly commanded to bear the ark. The manner of bearing it was also commanded. Rings were appended, through which staves were run. These poles, covered with gold, were to be supported on the shoulders of the bearers. They were forbidden to touch the ark upon pain of death. "After that, the sons of Kohath shall come to bear it: but they shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die." Such was God’s command. In transporting it from the house of Abinadab, David infringed the divine command by directing the ark to be borne on a cart drawn by oxen. Then when the animals stumbled, Uzza, with the intention of saving the ark from falling, touched it with his hand. He was instantly killed for his pious disobedience. "And they carried the ark of God in a new cart out of the house of Abinadab: and Uzza and Ahio drave the cart. And David and all Israel played before God with all their might, and with singing, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with timbrels, and with cymbals, and with trumpets. And when they came unto the threshing-floor of Chidon, Uzza put forth his hand to hold the ark; for the oxen stumbled. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzza, and he smote him, because he put his hand to the ark: and there he died before God." The offence was the more inexcusable, because the staves were never detached from the ark, and it is not at all likely that the Philistines, who had been subjected to so severe a treatment while they had it in their possession, had ventured to steal them. And it deserves consideration that those heathen had not been killed for handling the ark, while for doing the same thing God’s people, who should have known better, were taught an awful lesson.

The magnificent demonstration suffered a disastrous arrest, and the king of Israel, sobered by the warning he had received, returned home to do what he ought to have done before—to study the law of God. Having accomplished this neglected office, he makes a second attempt to remove the sacred symbol of God’s covenant to Jerusalem, but in a different fashion from the former. Let us hear the record. "And David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and for the Levites, for Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and Eliel and Amminadab, and said unto them, Ye are the chief of the fathers of the Levites: sanctify yourselves, both ye and your brethren, that ye may bring up the ark of the Lord God of Israel unto the place that I have prepared for it. For because ye did it not at the first, the Lord our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order. So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the ark of the Lord God of Israel. And the children of the Levites bare the ark upon their shoulders with the staves thereon, as Moses commanded according to the word of the Lord." It merits notice that when the ark was to be removed and instated in its place in the temple which was about to be dedicated, Solomon caused the "due order" to be observed. "And all the elders of Israel came; and the Levites took up the ark. And they brought up the ark, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle, these did the priests and the Levites bring up. . . . And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the Lord unto his place."^[2 Chron. 5:4, 5, 7.] The history of this matter enforces the impressive lesson that we are not at liberty to use our own judgment and to act without a divine warrant in regard to things of God’s appointment.

(7.) 2 Chron. 26:16-21: King Uzziah officiating as a priest. God had given no warrant to a king to act as priest, and Uzziah arrogantly undertook, without such warrant, to discharge sacerdotal functions. The consequences of his impiety are vividly depicted in the following record: "But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction: for he transgressed against the Lord his God, and went into the temple of the Lord to burn incense upon the altar of incense. And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore priests of the Lord, that were valiant men: and they withstood Uzziah the king, and said unto him, It appertaineth not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the priests, the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense: go out of the sanctuary; for thou hast trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honor from the Lord God. Then Uzziah was wroth, and had a censer in his hand to burn incense: and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house of the Lord, from beside the incense altar. And Azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon him, and behold, he was leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out from thence, yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the Lord had smitten him. And Uzziah the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, being a leper; for he was cut off from the house of the Lord."

(8.) 2 Chron. 28:3-5: King Ahaz doubly offending as to function and place. He performed priestly functions without a divine warrant, and performed them in places which God had not appointed. For this wicked self-assertion he was visited with divine vengeance. "Moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and burnt his children in the fire, after the abominations of the heathen whom the Lord had cast out before the children of Israel. He sacrificed also and burnt incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree. Wherefore the Lord his God delivered him into the hands of the king of Syria; and they smote him, and carried away a great multitude of them captives, and brought them to Damascus. And he was also delivered into the hands of the king of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter."

(9.) The jealousy of God for the principle of a divine warrant for everything in his worship is most conspicuously illustrated in New Testament times, by the tremendous judgments which befell the Jewish people for perpetuating, without such a warrant, the typical ritual of the temple-service. Until the great atoning sacrifice was offered, they had a positive warrant from God for the observance of that order. But when that sacrifice had been offered, the veil of the temple had been rent in twain, and the Holy Ghost had been copiously poured out at the inauguration of a new dispensation, the positive warrant for the temple-worship was withdrawn. This Stephen insisted on before the Council, and the illustrious witness for Christ was murdered for his testimony. He charged that when their fathers had no warrant to worship sacrificially except at the temple they had persisted in observing that worship elsewhere; and now that God had withdrawn the warrant to worship at the temple, they demanded the right to worship there. "Ye do always," said the glorious servant of Jesus, "resist the Holy Ghost." For this sin, by which they endorsed their rejection of their Messiah and Saviour, their church-state and national polity were demolished, and they, after the experience of an unparalleled tribulation, were scattered to the four winds of heaven. Have we not the evidence before us at this day?

The mighty principle has thus been established, by an appeal to the didactic statements of God’s word, and to special instances recorded in scriptural history, that a divine warrant is required for everything in the faith and practice of the Church, that whatsoever is not in the Scriptures commanded, either explicitly or by good and necessary consequence, is forbidden. The special application of this principle to the worship of God, as illustrated in the concrete examples which have been furnished, cannot escape the least attentive observation. God is seen manifesting a most vehement jealousy in protecting the purity of his worship. Any attempt to assert the judgment, the will, the taste of man apart from the express warrant of his Word, and to introduce into his worship human inventions, devices and methods, was overtaken by immediate retribution and rebuked by the thunderbolts of his wrath. Nor need we wonder at this; for the service which the creature professes to render to God reaches its highest and most formal expression in the worship which is offered him. In this act the majesty of the Most High is directly confronted. The worshipper presents himself face to face with the infinite Sovereign of heaven and earth, and assumes to lay at his feet the sincerest homage of the heart. In the performance of such an act to violate divine appointments or transcend divine prescription, to affirm the reason of a sinful creature against the wisdom, the will of a sinful creature against the authority, of God, is deliberately to flaunt an insult in his face, and to hurl an indignity against his throne. What else could follow but the flash of divine indignation? It is true that in the New Testament dispensation the same swift and visible arrest of this sin is not the ordinary rule. But the patience and forbearance of God can constitute no justification of its commission. Its punishment, if it be not repented of, is only deferred. "Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of .the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil;" while the delayed justice of God is gathering to itself indignation to burst forth like an overwhelming tempest in the dreadful day of wrath.

The principle that has been emphasized is in direct opposition to that maintained by Romanists and Prelatists, and I regret to say by lax Presbyterians, that what is not forbidden in the Scriptures is permitted. The Church of England, in her twentieth article, concedes to the church "a power to decree rites and ceremonies,"' with this limitation alone upon its exercise, "that it is not lawful for the church to ordain anything that is contrary to God’s written word." ^[Some curious and remarkable statements have been made with reference to this article. When, in 1808, the question of the introduction of instrumental music into public worship was before the Presbytery of Glasgow, the Rev. Dr. Begg, father of the late Dr. James Begg, published a treatise on the "Use of Organs," in which the following statement is attributed to the Rev. Alexander Hislop: "The Church of England has admitted into its articles this principle, that it belongs to ‘the church’ of her own authority, to ‘decree rites and ceremonies.’ (Article 20 ) As a matter of historical fact, this principle was never agreed to by the Convocation that adopted the Thirty-nine Articles, this sentence being found neither in the first printed edition of the articles, nor in the draft of them that passed the Convocation, and which is still in existence, with the autograph signatures of the members; but it is believed to have been surreptitiously inserted by the hand of Queen Elizabeth herself, who had much of the over-bearing spirit of her father, Henry VIII., and who, as head of the church, which the English constitution made her, was determined to have a pompous worship under her ecclesiastical control." In support of this statement, reference is made to "authorities in Presbyterian Review, July, 1843." The Use of Organs, etc., by James Begg, D.D., (p. 150). See also Bannerman’s Church of Christ, Vol. I., p. 339.] The principle of the discretionary power of the church in regard to things not commanded by Christ in his Word, was the chief fountain from which flowed the gradually increasing tide of corruptions that swept the Latin church into apostasy from the gospel of God’s grace. And as surely as causes produce their appropriate effects, and history repeats itself in obedience to that law, any Protestant church which embodies that principle in its creed is destined, sooner or later, to experience a similar fate. The same, too, may be affirmed of a church which formally rejects it and practically conforms to it. The reason is plain. The only bridle that checks the degenerating tendency of the church—a tendency manifested in all ages—is the Word of God: for the Spirit of grace Himself ordinarily operates only in connection with that Word. If this restraint be discarded, the downward lapse is sure. The words of the great theologian, John Owen—and the British Isles have produced no greater—are solemn and deserve to be seriously pondered: "The principle that the church hath power to institute any thing or ceremony belonging to the worship of God, either as to matter or manner, beyond the observance of such circumstances as necessarily attend such ordinances as Christ himself hath instituted, lies at the bottom of all the horrible superstition and idolatry, of all the confusion, blood, persecution and wars that have for so long a season spread themselves over the face of the Christian world."

In view of such considerations as these, confirmed, as they are, by the facts of all past history, it is easy to see how irrelevant and baseless is the taunt flung by high churchmen, ritualists and latitudinarians of every stripe against the maintainers of the opposite principle, that they are narrow-minded bigots who take delight in insisting upon trivial details. The truth is exactly the other way. The principle upon which this cheap ridicule is cast is simple, broad, majestic. It affirms only the things that God has commanded, the institutions and ordinances that he has prescribed, and besides this, discharges only a negative office which sweeps away every trifling invention of man’s meretricious fancy. It is not the supporters of this principle, but their opponents, who delight in insisting upon crossings, genuflexions and bowings to the east, upon vestments, altars and candles, upon organs and cornets, and "the dear antiphonies that so bewitch their prelates and their chapters with the goodly echo they make;" in fine, upon all that finical trumpery which, inherited from the woman clothed in scarlet, marks the trend backward to the Rubicon and the seven-hilled mart of souls.

But whatever others may think or do, Presbyterians cannot forsake this principle without the guilt of defection from their own venerable standards and from the testimonies sealed by the blood of their fathers. Among the principles that the Reformers extracted from the rubbish of corruption and held up to light again, none were more comprehensive, far-reaching and profoundly reforming than this. It struck at the root of every false doctrine and practice, and demanded the restoration of the true. Germany has been infinitely the worse because of Luther’s failure to apply it to the full. Calvin enforced it more fully. The great French Protestant Church, with the exception of retaining a liturgical relic of popery, gave it a grand application, and France suffered an irreparable loss when she dragooned almost out of existence the body that maintained it. John Knox stamped it upon the heart of the Scottish Church, and it constituted the glory of the English Puritans. Alas! that it is pasting into decadence in the Presbyterian churches of England, Scotland and America. What remains but that those who still see it, and cling to it as to something dearer than life itself, should continue to utter, however feebly, however inoperatively, their unchanging testimony to its truth? It is the acropolis of the church’s liberties, the palladium of her purity. That gone, nothing will be left to hope, but to strain its gaze towards the dawn of the millennial day. Then—we are entitled to expect—a more thorough-going and glorious reformation will be effected than any that has blessed the church and the world since the magnificent propagation of Christianity by the labors of the inspired apostles themselves.


# ARGUMENT FROM THE OLD TESTAMENT.

IN the Jewish dispensation God was pleased to proceed in accordance
with the great principle which has been signalized, in regard to the
introduction of instrumental music into the public worship of his
people. He kept the ordering of this part of his formal and
instituted worship in his own hands. There is positive proof that it
was never made an element of that worship except by his express
command. Without his warrant it was excluded; only with it was it
employed.

​1. Let us notice the operation of this principle with reference to
*the tabernacle-worship.*

Moses received the mode of constructing the tabernacle and the order
of its worship by divine revelation. "See, saith he, that thou make
all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the mount." It
will be admitted that the instructions thus divinely given descended
to the most minute details—the sort of fabrics and skins to be used,
and their diverse colors, the pins, the ouches and the taches, the
ablutions, the vestments and the actions of the officiating priests
and Levites, the ingredients of the holy ointment and the incense,
the parts, the arrangements, the instruments of worship,—to
everything connected with the tabernacle these specific directions
referred. Of course, if God had intended instrumental music to be
employed, it would have been included in these particular
directions; the instruments would have been specified for its
performance, and regulations enjoined for its use.

What, now, are the facts? No directions are given respecting
instruments of music. Two instruments of sound are provided for, but
they were of such a character as to make it impracticable to use
them ordinarily as accompaniments of the voice in singing. The
record is: "And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Make thee two
trumpets of silver; of a whole piece shalt thou make them: that thou
mayest use them for the calling of the assembly, and for the
journeying of the camps." "And if ye go to war in your land against
the enemy that oppresseth you, thou shalt blow an alarm with the
trumpets; and ye shall be remembered before the Lord your God, and
ye shall be saved from your enemies. Also in the days of your
gladness, and in your solemn days, and in the beginnings of your
months, ye shall blow with the trumpets over your burnt-offerings,
and over the sacrifices of your peace-offerings; that they may be to
you for a memorial before your God: I am the Lord your God." The
blowing of these trumpets as a signal for marching, or for going to
war, had certainly nothing to do with worship, neither did the call
of the congregation to assemble belong to the performance of
worship, any more than a church bell now, the ringing of which
ceases when the services begin. There is nothing to show that the
blowing of the trumpets, on festival days and at the beginning of
months, over the offerings was accompanied by singing on the part of
priests and Levites. There is no mention of that fact, and Jewish
tradition opposes the supposition. Moreover, it is almost certain
that the blowing of trumpets on such occasions was a representative
act performed by the priests, and that consequently it was not
accompanied by the singing of the congregation. It is true that
there is one recorded exception (2 Chron. 5:12, 13) which occurred,
however, when the tabernacle had given way to the temple. At the
dedication of the latter edifice, the priests blew the trumpets at
the same time that the Levites sang and played upon instruments of
music, so as "to make one sound;" but it is evident that on that
great occasion of rejoicing, what was aimed at was not musical
harmony, but a powerful crash of jubilant sound. We are shut up to
the conclusion that there was nothing in the tabernacle-worship, as
ordered by Moses, which could be justly characterized as
instrumental music.

This absence of instrumental music from the services of the
tabernacle continued not only during the wanderings of the
Israelites in the desert, but after their entrance into the promised
land, throughout the protracted period of the Judges, the reign of
Saul, and a part of David’s. This is a noteworthy fact. Although
David was a lover of instrumental music, and himself a performer
upon the harp, it was not until some time after his reign had begun
that this order of things was changed, and, as we shall see, changed
by divine command. Let us hear the scriptural record (1 Chron.
23:1-6): "So when David was old and full of days, he made Solomon
his son king over Israel. And he gathered together all the princes
of Israel, with the priests and the Levites. Now the Levites were
numbered by the age of thirty years and upward: and their number by
their polls, man by man, was fifty and eight thousand; of which
twenty and four thousand were to set forward the work of the house
of the Lord; and six thousand were officers and judges: moreover
four thousand were porters; and four thousand praised the Lord with
the instruments which I made, said David, to praise therewith. And
David divided them into courses among the sons of Levi, namely,
Gershon, Kohath and Merari." Now, how did David come to make this
alteration in the Mosaic order which had been established by divine
revelation? For the answer let us again consult the sacred record (1
Chron. 28:11-13, 19): "Then David gave to Solomon his son the
pattern of the porch, and of the houses thereof, and of the
treasuries thereof, and of the inner parlors thereof, and of the
place of the mercy-seat, and the pattern of all that he had by the
Spirit, of the courts of the house of the Lord, and of all the
chambers round about, of the treasuries of the house of God, and of
the treasuries of the dedicated things: also for the courses of the
priests and the Levites, and for all the work of the service of the
house of the Lord, and for all the vessels of service in the house
of the Lord . . . . All this, said David, the Lord made me
understand in writing by his hand upon me, and all the works of this
pattern." 2 Chron. 29:25, 26: "And he [Solomon] set the Levites in
the house of the Lord with cymbals, with psalteries, and with harps,
according to the commandment of David, and of Gad the king’s seer,
and of Nathan the prophet: for so was the commandment of the Lord by
his prophets."

In the light of these statements of God’s Word several things are
made evident, which challenge our serious attention. First,
instrumental music never was divinely warranted as an element in the
tabernacle-worship until David received inspired instructions to
introduce it, as preparatory to the transition which was about to be
effected to the more elaborate ritual of the temple. Secondly, when
the temple was to be built and its order of worship to be
instituted, David received a divine revelation in regard to it, just
as Moses had concerning the tabernacle with its ordinances. Thirdly,
this direct revelation to David was enforced upon Solomon, and upon
the priests and Levites, by inspired communications touching the
same subject from the prophets Gad and Nathan. Fourthly,
instrumental music would not have been constituted an element in the
temple-worship, had not God expressly authorized it by his command.
The public worship of the tabernacle, up to the time when it was to
be merged into the temple, had been a stranger to it, and so great
an innovation could have been accomplished only by divine authority.
God’s positive enactment grounded the propriety of the change.

Is it not clear that the great principle, that whatsoever is not
commanded by God, either expressly or impliedly, in relation to the
public worship of his house, is forbidden, meets here a conspicuous
illustration? The bearing of all this upon the Christian church is
as striking as it is obvious. If, under a dispensation dominantly
characterized by external appointments, instrumental music could not
be introduced into the worship of God’s sanctuary, except in
consequence of a warrant furnished by him, how can a church,
existing under the far simpler and more spiritual dispensation of
the gospel, venture, without such a warrant, to incorporate it into
its public services? and that no such warrant can be pleaded will be
made apparent as the argument expands.

​2. Against the conclusiveness of this argument it is objected, that
the Israelites were accustomed to use instrumental music at their
option, and that especially was this the case on occasions of public
rejoicing, when thanksgivings were, by masses of the people,
rendered to God for signal benefits conferred by his delivering
providence. So far as the allegation concerns the employment of that
kind of music in private or social life, it is irrelevant to the
scope of an argument which has reference explicitly and solely to
its use in the public worship of God’s house. This will rule out
many of the instances which are cited to prove the untenableness of
the principle contended for in this discussion.

There remains, however, another class of cases to which attention
may be fairly directed, cases in which public worship appeared to be
offered. Into this class fall the instances of Miriam’s playing upon
the timbrel at the Red Sea, the welcome of Saul and David by the
women with singing, dancing and instrumental music, the like
instance of Jephthah’s daughter, the accompanying of the ark by
David and Israel with bands of music, and the minstrelsy of the
prophets to whom Saul joined himself. In reply to the objection
based upon these instances, the general ground may be taken that
they are examples not of church-worship, but of public rejoicing on
the part of the nation or of communities, with the exception of the
prophets’ minstrelsy, which will be separately considered. Some
special remarks are, however, pertinent in regard to them.

In the first place, it will be noticed from the account of the
triumphant rejoicing on the shore of the Red Sea that the men sang
only: "Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the
Lord, and spake, saying," etc. What can be gathered from this simple
singing of the males of Israel, in praise of God for their great
deliverance, in favor of instrumental music in worship, it is rather
difficult to see.

In the second place, it was Miriam and the women who used
instruments of music on the occasion: "And Miriam the prophetess,
the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand; and all the women
went after her with timbrels and with dances." The argument of the
objector proves too much. If from this instance the legitimacy of
employing instrumental music in the public worship of the Jewish
Church is to be inferred, so may the legitimacy of its use by women
in that worship. But the history of the appointments of that worship
furnishes no evidence of the tenableness of the latter inference.
The contrary is proved. Women were excluded from any prominent, at
least any official, function in the services of God’s house in the
Mosaic dispensation. [[1]](#[1]) It was the males of Israel who were
commanded to repair to Jerusalem on those festival occasions when
bursts of instrumental music were united with the singing of praise
in the temple-worship. Indeed, so far from the women taking an
active part in that worship, it would seem to have been limited, as
to its outward expression in sounds, to the priests and Levites,
who, as the divinely appointed official representatives of the
congregation, sang and played on instruments of music. The argument
might do for a modern advocate of woman’s rights, but it will hardly
answer for the Jewish dispensation. It is as barren of results as
was Miriam herself of issue.

In the third place, it again proves too much, if the word rendered
"dances" is correctly translated. It would prove that religious
dancing was an element in the prescribed worship of God’s people.
The consequence refutes the argument.

But to return to the general position, that the instances mentioned
in the objection were those not of ecclesiastical worship, but of
national rejoicing. Against this general view it is urged, in reply,
that an unwarrantable distinction is made between the Jewish church
and the Jewish nation. This raises the question whether such a
distinction is valid. Were state and church identical? Did the
members of the state act as members of the church? Did the members
of the church act as members of the state? It may be admitted that,
in the main—that is, with certain exceptions, such as the proselytes
of righteousness, for example—the nation and the church were
numerically coincident. Ordinarily—that is, with certain
exceptions—the rite of circumcision designated one alike a member of
the state and of the church. But that these two institutes were
identical; that the functions of the one were the functions of the
other, considered as organisms, is to my mind not susceptible of
proof. It would be unsuitable here to enter at large into this
question, but it lies across the track of the argument in hand, and
a brief consideration of it, as it is not illogically interjected,
will not be regarded as impertinent. The question is acutely and
ably discussed by that great man, George Gillespie, in his *Aaron’s
Rod Blossoming.*I shall give a mere outline, the bare heads, of a
part of his argument to prove that the Jewish state and church,
although in the main the same materially, that is, as to personal
constituents, were organically and formally distinct institutes; and
I do this the more readily because Gillespie’s valuable work is now
rare and difficult of access. They are distinct:

(1.) In respect of laws. The judicial law was given to the state;
the ceremonial law to the church.

(2.) In respect of acts. The members of the state did not, as such,
worship God and offer sacrifices in the temple, etc.; and the
members of the church did not, as such, inflict physical
punishments.

(3.) In respect of controversies to be decided. Some concerned the
Lord’s matters, and were to be ecclesiastically settled; some the
king’s matters, and were to be civilly decided.

(4.) In respect of officers. The priests and Levites were church
officers; magistrates and judges were state officers.

(5.) In respect of continuance. The Romans took away the Jewish
state and civil government, but the Jewish church and ecclesiastical
government remained.

(6.) In respect of variation. The constitution and government of the
Jewish state underwent serious changes under different civil
administrations; but we cannot say that the church was remodelled as
often as the state was.

(7.) In respect of members. There were proselytes, the proselytes of
righteousness, who were admitted to membership in the church with
its privileges, but were not entitled to the privileges of members
of the state.

(8.) In respect of government. In the prosecution of this argument
to prove the distinctness of the Jewish church and state, Gillespie
takes the ground that there were two Sanhedrims, one civil, the
other ecclesiastical; and he cites, as maintaining that view,
Zepperus, Junius, Piscator, Wolfius, Gerhard, Godwin, Bucerus,
Walaeus, Pelargus, Sopingius, the Dutch Annotators, Bertramus,
Apollonius, Strigelius, the professors of Groningen, Reynolds,
Paget, L’Empereur, and Elias, cited by Buxtorf.

[This special argument Gillespie presses elaborately and acutely by
more than a dozen separate considerations derived from Scripture.
But as the question has been ably debated on both sides by men
learned in Jewish affairs, no positive opinion is here expressed as
to the conclusiveness of the proofs presented by the great Scotch
divine.]

(9.) There was an ecclesiastical excommunication among the Jews
different from the penalties inflicted by the criminal law of the
state.

Such are the ribs merely of a powerful argument in favor of the
distinction between the Jewish state and church, by one who had the
reputation of being one of the astutest debaters in the Westminster
Assembly of Divines. That distinguished scholar, Dr. Joseph Addison
Alexander, expresses the opinion, in his *Primitive Church
Offices,*that the Jewish state and church were one organization,
with two distinct classes of functions, one civil and another
ecclesiastical. But Gillespie shows that the numerical components of
some of the courts were different; they consisted of different men.
Take either view, however, and the ends of this argument are met,
more conclusively upon Gillespie’s, it is true, but conclusively
upon both. What the state as such did, the church as such did not
do, and *vice versa.*And if this be so, it follows that the same
thing holds in regard to the people. What they did in a national
capacity they did not necessarily do in an ecclesiastical. When,
then, Miriam and the women with her, the women who welcomed Saul and
David returning home in triumph, the daughter of Jephthah
celebrating her father’s victory, and the mass of people who
accompanied the ark in its transportation to Jerusalem, played on
instruments of music, they were commemorating national events with
appropriate national rejoicings. They were not acting worship as the
church or as the members of the church.

In regard to the company of prophets whom Saul joined, it is
sufficient to say that they were, in part, the poets and minstrels
of the nation, and that as the incident occurred during the
existence of the tabernacle, the incontestable proof which has been
already exhibited, that instrumental music such as that which they
employed was not allowed in its worship, is enough to sweep all
ground from beneath the objection now considered against the
operation of the great principle of limitation upon church worship
for which I have contended. This holds good whether or not the view
which has been presented as to these prophets be correct. Their
playing on instruments had nothing to do with the public, formally
instituted worship of the house of the Lord.

It has thus been shown, by a direct appeal to the Scriptures, that
during all the protracted period in which the tabernacle was God’s
sanctuary the great principle was enforced, that only what God
commands is permitted, and what he does not command is forbidden, in
the public worship of his house. Moses with all his wisdom, the
Judges with all their intrepidity, Saul with all his waywardness and
self-will, David the sweet Psalmist of Israel with all his skill in
the musical art, did not, any of them, venture to violate that
principle, and introduce into the public services of God’s house the
devices of their imagination or the inventions of their taste. The
lesson is certainly impressive, coming, as it does, from that
distant age; and it behooves those who live in a dispensation this
side of the cross of Calvary and the day of Pentecost to show cause,
beyond a peradventure, why they are discharged from the duty of
obedience to the divine will in this vitally important matter.

​3. The next step in this argument is to show that no musical
instruments were used in the synagogue-worship.

As this is almost universally admitted, no extended argument is
needed to prove it. It might have been expected from the jealousy
which God had always peculiarly manifested in enforcing the
principle that without an express warrant from him nothing was to be
introduced into the public worship of his people, and especially
from the facts already emphasized that no instruments of music were
allowed to be employed in the tabernacle, and that they were
included in the service at the temple only in consequence of
explicit divine instructions to that effect, it might have been
expected that instrumental music would not have been incorporated
into the worship of the Jews on ordinary Sabbath days not embraced
in the three national festivals. This presumption is confirmed by
the facts of the case.

The writers who have most carefully investigated Jewish antiquities,
and have written learnedly and elaborately in regard to the
synagogue, concur in showing that its worship was destitute of
instrumental music. What singing there was, and there was not much
of it in proportion to the other elements of worship, was plain and
simple. In his great work *On the Ancient Synagogue,*Vitringa shows
[[2]](#[2]) that there were only two instruments of sound used in
connection with the synagogue, and that these were employed, not in
worship or along with it as an accompaniment, but as *publishing
signals*—first, for proclaiming the new year; secondly for
announcing the beginning of the Sabbath; thirdly, for publishing the
sentence of excommunication; and fourthly, for heralding fasts.
These were their sole uses. There were no sacrifices over which they
were to be blown, as in the tabernacle and temple. And from the
nature of the instruments it is plain that they could not have
accompanied the voice in singing. They were only of two
kinds—trumpets (*tubae*), and rams’ horns or cornets (*buccinae*).
The former were straight, the latter curved. Nor is it to be
supposed that the cornet, like the modern instrument of that name,
was susceptible of modulation, and therefore of accompanying vocal
melody. It had but one note, and was so easy to be blown that a
child could sound it. Further, they were, for the most part, used
not even in connection with the synagogue buildings, but were blown
from the roofs of houses, so as to be heard at a distance. Enough
has been said to prove that no instrumental music entered into the
services of the Jewish synagogue. [[3]](#[3])

The elements of worship in the Mosaic dispensation were of two
kinds:

(1.) The *generic*or *essential.*Those observed in the synagogue
were the reading and exposition of God’s Word, exhortation, prayers,
accompanied with singing, if the common recitation by the people of
parts of the Psalms can be so characterized, and the contribution of
alms. Without here raising the question whether synagogues had an
existence prior to the Babylonian exile, one would risk little in
taking the ground that, during all the time of the church’s
development in the past, God’s people had been accustomed to meet on
Sabbath days for engagement in these essential parts of divine
worship. The patriarchal dispensation being left out of account, in
which, however, every sentiment of piety and reverence, the original
institution of the seventh day as one of rest, and the acquaintance
of the Israelites with the law of the Sabbath before the
promulgation of the Sinaitic law, render it highly probable that
such a practice was maintained, a few reasons will be intimated in
favor of its maintenance during the period of the Jewish economy:

First, The fourth commandment made the sacred observance of every
Sabbath day obligatory. It is not reasonable to suppose that the law
contemplated the merely individual and private keeping holy of the
day.

Secondly, The Israelites, during their sojourn in the wilderness,
were accustomed to worship every Sabbath day in mass at the
tabernacle. It was accessible from every part of the encampment
which was around it on every side. The proof of this is given in
Lev. 23:3: "Six days Shall work be done: but the seventh day is the
Sabbath of rest, an holy convocation." The prescriptive usage of
meeting for worship on every Sabbath was thus established during
their forty years’ pilgrimage in: the desert. In all that time
during which they held weekly assemblies, let it also be observed,
they knew nothing of instrumental music. It is altogether
unreasonable to suppose that this habit, ingrained into them in the
early period of their national existence and consecrated by
innumerable sacred and splendid associations, would have ceased to
be influential after their wanderings had ceased and they had been
permanently located in the land of rest. Such an innovation upon
their customs could only have occurred in consequence either of a
divine command enforcing the change, or of a serious defection from
their religious principles. We know that neither of these causes
operated to produce the supposed revolution in their habits of
worship. Upon their settlement in Canaan, they were of course
dispersed in consequence of their tribal distribution throughout the
length and breadth of the country from Dan to Beersheba, and, as the
tabernacle was necessarily at any particular time confined to one
spot, it was not accessible to congregations representing all
Israel, except upon the occasions of the prescribed national
festivals. What, then, were they doing on all the other Sabbaths of
the year in their cities and towns, villages and rural
neighborhoods? It cannot be supposed that on those Sabbaths they
never met for worship. [[4]](#[4]) This consideration is mightily
enhanced by the fact that only the males of Israel were enjoined to
attend the great annual festivals. Were the women, the mothers of
Israel, the trainers of children and youth, left destitute of all
public worship? The supposition cannot be entertained. Provision
must have been made for their engagement in the stated public
worship of their God.

Thirdly, The priests and Levites, when not occupied in the discharge
of their formal, official duties at the temple, were distributed
through the land, and there is evidence to show that they acted as
teachers of schools. Is it likely that ministers of religion would
have educated the people in everything but the divine law, or that
they would have failed to assemble them on Sabbath days for the
reception of religious instruction, or that such instruction would
have been unattended by worship? It may be said that this amounts to
no more than a presumption. But if so, it is a powerful presumption,
and is strongly confirmed by other considerations, such as those
that follow.

Fourthly, The Israelites were commanded to proclaim the incoming of
the Sabbaths and the new moons by the blowing of trumpets. That
these seasons were observed with the solemn worship of assemblies is
rendered almost certain by the passage in 2 Kings, chapter 4., in
which it is intimated that on those occasions the prophets were
accustomed to hold meetings for instruction and worship. The
Shunammite, whose son had been restored to life by Elisha, having
lost the child by death, proposed to her husband to provide her with
the necessaries for a journey to the prophet at Mount Carmel. His
reply was, "Wherefore wilt thou go to him to-day? It is neither new
moon, nor Sabbath?" The answer cannot be understood except upon the
supposition here contended for—namely, that the Sabbaths and new
moons were seasons of gathering for instruction and worship; and it
is certain that Carmel was not Jerusalem, and that weekly Sabbaths
and the beginnings of months did not occur only three times a year.

Fifthly, In Psalm 74:8, the Psalmist, in view of the devastation of
the country by its enemies, thus laments: "They said in their
hearts, Let us destroy them together: they have burned up all the
synagogues of God in the land." It is not necessary to suppose that
the buildings here rendered *synagogues*exactly corresponded with
those erected for worship after the return from the Babylonish
captivity, but they were places for worship, [[5]](#[5]) Possibly
they were, as Prideaux and others suggest, uncovered places of
worship, *proseuchae,* but they were buildings, else how could they
have been burned? And that they were not the halls adjoining the
temple, as some conjecture, is proved by the statement that they
were throughout the land: "All the synagogues of God in the land."
Were the temple buildings ubiquitous? In this exposition not a few
eminent commentators agree. Dr. McCurdy, in Lange’s Commentary on
the place, says that these buildings were *places of meeting*in
different parts of the land. Calvin remarks: "I readily take the
Hebrew *moadim*in the sense of *synagogues,* because he says
*all*the sanctuaries, and speaks expressly *of the whole land."*
Adam Clarke observes: "The word *moadey,*which we translate,
synagogues, may be taken in a more general sense, and mean any
places where religious assemblies were held; and that such places
and assemblies did exist long before the Babylonish captivity is
pretty evident from different parts of Scripture." [[6]](#[6])

Dr, Plumptre, in the article, on synagogues in Smith’s *Dictionary
of the Bible,*citing Vitringa *On the Synagogue* (pp, 271, *ff.*),
says: "Jewish writers have claimed for their synagogues a very
remote antiquity. In well-nigh every place where the phrase "before
the Lord" appears they recognize in it a known sanctuary, a fixed
place of meeting, and therefore a synagogue." This view is taken in
the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan. "On the one hand," says Dr.
Plumptre, "it is probable that if new moons and Sabbaths were
observed at all [it was shown above that they were], they must have
been attended by some celebration apart from as well as at the
tabernacle or the temple. . . On the other, so far as we find traces
of such local worship, it seems to have fallen too readily into a
fetich religion, sacrifices to ephods and teraphim, in groves and on
high places, offering nothing but a contrast to the ‘reasonable
service,’ the prayers, psalms, instruction in the law, of the later
synagogue." This, to some extent not universally, is lamentably
true; but the abuse proves the legitimate use of these stated
seasons and places of public worship separately from the tabernacle
and temple services.

The gatherings of the elders during the exile for instruction by the
prophet, which are repeatedly mentioned in Ezekiel, infer that the
practice of holding assemblies for worship and the hearing of the
law antedated the captivity. The exiles carried the custom with
them. The words in Ezek. 11:15, 16, seem to imply that God
manifested his gracious presence in these meetings of his people as
in little sanctuaries, somewhat as in former and better times he had
done at the greater sanctuaries in their native land. "This view is
supported," remarks the learned author who has been quoted, "by the
LXX., the Vulgate, and the Authorized Version. It is confirmed by
the general *consensus* of Jewish interpreters."

If these arguments have availed to prove that the people of Israel
were accustomed to hold stated meetings for worship apart from the
services of the tabernacle and the temple, the well-ascertained
practice of the post-exilian synagogues clearly establishes the
absence of instrumental music from those weekly assemblies. For had
that kind of music been employed in those meetings, it would
inevitably have been continued in the synagogue-worship. Every
conceivable consideration would have opposed its elimination—the
powerful force of long-continued precedents, the prescriptive usages
of the past hallowed by sacred associations, the conservative
sentiment which resists a revolutionary innovation, and more than
all the demands of human taste and the requirements of an
acknowledged artistic standard. But it is certain that no
instrumental music was used in the worship of the later synagogue.
The argument is well-nigh irresistible.

If it be contended that instrumental music, which had previously
existed, was purged out of the regular worship of the Jews by the
post-exilian reformation, the question at issue is given up. For if
the Jews reformed the worship of the church by abandoning
instrumental music, much more should it have been discarded at the
greater reformation inaugurated by Christianity. Otherwise it would
be conceded that the Christian Church was less pure in its worship,
less thoroughly reformed, than was the Jewish Church in its later
and better state.

It has thus been shown that the essential parts of divine worship
were maintained by the people of God in their ordinary Sabbath-day
worship during the Jewish dispensation; and it is the purpose of
this discussion, as it shall be developed, to evince the fact that
only these essential elements of worship passed over into the
Christian dispensation. They are permanent, and like the covenant of
grace in its generic and essential features as contradistinguished
to the specific and accidental, were designed to endure unchanged
through all dispensations.

(2.) The second kind of elements of worship in the Mosaic economy
was the *Specific*or *Accidental,*which was *Typical and
Symbolical,*and as such temporary in its nature. [[7]](#[7])
Warburton says that types and symbols are generically the same in
that they are both representations, but they are specifically
different in that the type represents something future, the symbol
something past or present. Hence he regarded the sacraments of the
New Testament as symbols. Thornwell observes that they differ from
each other in the circumstance that types teach by analogy, and
symbols by expressive signs. Without pausing to discuss the nature
of the specific differences between them, or to consider the
question whether some of the elements in the Jewish ritual service
were not at the same time both typical and symbolical, I proceed to
show that the types of the temple-worship did not, as is too often
carelessly assumed, have exclusive reference to the sacrifice of
Christ, but that some of them represented beforehand the effects to
be produced in the New Testament dispensation by the Holy Ghost; and
I will then attempt further to show, that the instrumental music of
the temple-worship fell into the latter class, and therefore, as
having fulfilled its typical and temporary office, passed away and
vanished upon the introduction of the Christian economy. But before
these points are developed, it is requisite that a few things be
premised.

In the first place, no element in the synagogue-worship was typical
and temporary. This is too evident to require argument. The reading
and exposition of the divine Word, hortatory addresses, the singing
of psalms, and the contribution of alms, are elements of worship
which cannot be regarded as types foreshadowing substantial
realities to come. They belong to the class essential and permanent.

In the second place, the essential and permanent elements of
worship, as fundamental to all public religious service, entered of
course into the temple-worship. In this respect there was no
difference between the worship of the temple and that of the
synagogue.

In the third place, whatever element of worship was absent from the
synagogue and present in the temple was typical or symbolical in its
character. Having in common what was essential and permanent, the
specific difference between them lay in the possession by one of the
accidental and temporary, and the non-possession by the other of the
same. Now the only elements falling into this latter class were the
typical and symbolical. These were embraced in the service of the
temple and excluded from that of the synagogue. Consequently, as
instrumental music was not included in the worship of the synagogue,
but was in that of the temple, it must be regarded as having been
either typical or symbolical. Symbolical it cannot be considered; it
must therefore have been typical. If so, the necessity is recognized
of attempting, in the progress of this discussion, to show of what
it was typical.

In the fourth place, some of the elements of the temple-service were
directly and solely typical of Christ, especially as a priest and as
the atoning sacrifice to be offered for sin. Others were typical
only of the Holy Ghost; and still others were typical, at one and
the same time, both of Christ and the Holy Spirit. To use thc
technically accurate language of theology, the impetration or
acquisition of salvation is attributed to Christ, the application of
it to the Holy Spirit. But the grace which applies the benefits
secured by the work of Christ is closely related to the work by
which they were acquired. Indeed it is itself acquired by the merit
and intercession of the Redeemer. They therefore suppose and
implicate each other. Consequently some of the types have a double
reference to both. When they immediately represent the Holy Spirit
they at the same time mediately represent Christ. Some of the
positions taken in these preliminary remarks may be justly regarded
and carried along with the discussion as assumptions demanding no
proof, and others will be substantiated as the argument proceeds.

*First,* The offices and work of the Holy Spirit were as clearly and
definitely predicted and promised in the Old Testament Scriptures as
were those of Christ. The truth is that they cannot possibly be
disjoined. Neither would be operative to salvation without the
other. The whole Old Testament revelation, so far as it was
evangelical, bore a twofold reference to the blood and the water, to
the meritorious acquisition of salvation by the righteousness and
atoning death of Christ and its efficacious application by the grace
of the Holy Ghost. In the conception of redemption which we find
everywhere in the Bible justification and sanctification are never
dissociated. They are ever represented as the complementary and
equally necessary factors of one whole and complete salvation. This
is the very genius of the gospel as well before as after the death
of the Son of God. As it was proclaimed to our first parents,
revealed to Abel, Enoch and Noah, and, as the apostle expressly
testifies, "preached before to Abraham," it was essentially
promissory in its nature. The same promissory character was still
more fully disclosed in the features of the Mosaic dispensation, in
the Psalms and Prophets, and, as I hope to show, in the typical
rites and ceremonies of the temple-service. That the person and
offices of the Holy Spirit were distinctly known to believers under
the old dispensation is proved by utterances in the Psalms, a book
which represents the experience of God’s true people in every
condition of their history. In the 51^st^ Psalm we have the prayers:
"Take not thy Holy Spirit from me;" "Uphold me with thy free
Spirit;" and in the 143^rd^, "Thy Spirit is good; lead me to the
land of uprightness." Isaiah (chap. 63:10) says: "They rebelled and
vexed his Holy Spirit," which words, as they were spoken of the
"house of Israel," suppose that they knew, or ought to have known,
the Holy Spirit as their guide. It may be added that the sacred
historians of the Old Testament over and over again assert, with
reference to the heroic worthies of that dispensation, that the
Spirit of the Lord came upon them. All this goes to show that the
promises which related to the work of the Holy Spirit at a future
period of the church’s development were not unintelligible by those
to whom they were delivered.

Let us cite some of those declarations which point to the work of
the Spirit in the new dispensation. Isa. 32:15-17: After describing
the desolation that would be visited upon the land of Israel, the
prophet says: "Until the Spirit be poured upon us from on high, and
the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be
counted for a forest. Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness,
and righteousness remain in the fruitful field. And the work of
righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness
quietness and assurance forever." Isa. 42:1: "Behold my servant,
whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my
Spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles."
Isa. 44:3, 4: "For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and
floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and
my blessing upon thine offspring; and they shall spring up as among
the grass, as willows by the water courses." Isa. 59:19, 20, 21: "So
shall they fear the name of the Lord from the west, and his glory
from the rising of the sun. When the enemy shall come in like a
flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him.
And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from
transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord. As for me, this is my
covenant with them, saith the Lord; my Spirit that is upon thee, and
my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy
seed’s seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and forever." This
prophecy in regard to the Spirit resisting a flood of enemies is
referred by the Rabbins to the coming of the Messiah. Ezek.
36:25-27: "Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall
be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I
cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will
I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your
flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments and do them." Ezek. 37:13, 14: "And ye shall
know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your graves, O my
people, and brought you up out of your graves, and shall put my
Spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I shall place you in your own
land: then shall ye know that I the Lord have spoken it, and
performed it, saith the Lord." Joel 2:28, 29: "And it shall come to
pass afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh; and
your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall
dream dreams, your young men shall see visions: and also upon the
servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my
Spirit." For the reference of this glorious promise to New Testament
times we have the inspired testimony of the apostle Peter on the day
of Pentecost, when it was measurably but remarkably fulfilled. In
close connection with the promise that a fountain shall be opened to
the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and
for uncleanness, Zechariah utters also the promise, 12:10: "And I
will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications." It matters
little whether or not with some we take the word *spirit*here to
indicate a disposition. That disposition can be produced only by the
Holy Spirit. The apostle Paul, it deserves to be considered, terms
the Spirit "that holy Spirit of promise," Eph. 1:13; and in Gal.
3:13, 14, he speaks very explicitly about this matter: "Christ hath
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us:
for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree: that
the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through
faith." How closely does he couple the atoning work of Christ and
the applying work of the Spirit! And how clearly does he enounce the
fact that the Spirit, as well as Christ, was promised in the ancient
Scriptures and the early revelations made to the people of God!

*Secondly,*The offices of the Holy Ghost, together with their saving
and joy-imparting effects, were typified, as well as the priestly
work and expiatory death of Christ, in the services which were
peculiar to the temple. In view of what has been shown concerning
the clearness and fulness with which the work of the Spirit in New
Testament times is announced in the prophetical writings we would be
prepared to find this true upon an examination of the temple types;
nor will we be disappointed by such an investigation. Those types,
as well as the prophecies, proclaimed the gospel. They powerfully
preached the whole salvation of the gospel,—the blood and the water,
justification and sanctification. How could it be otherwise? As God
intended by these typical elements to represent, as by
object-lessons, the scheme of redemption to his ancient people who
lived before its actual achievement, is it reasonable to suppose
that he would have furnished an imperfect and inadequate
pre-figuration of its essential parts? Would he have omitted all
instruction beforehand in regard to the mode of its application? It
is difficult to conceive how any theologian can fail to see the
obvious foreshadowing in the temple furniture and service of the
grace and work of the ever-blessed Spirit. I shall select for
comment only those elements which appear with the greatest clearness
to typify the offices of the Holy Spirit.

*The Washing with Water.*Why was water employed as a type, if not to
signify what the New Testament Scriptures so unmistakably
characterize under that figure? "Except a man," said the Lord Jesus,
"be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God." (Jno. 3:5). The preposition here is omitted before
the Spirit in the original, and the words may well be rendered "of
water even the Spirit." At least this must be the meaning in the
judgment of any one who would not co-ordinate external water with
the almighty grace of the Holy Ghost in the new creation of the
soul. And to talk of one’s being spiritually born in part of an
outward symbol is to speak unintelligibly. Paul several times uses
washing and water to signify cleansing by the Holy Spirit. Eph.
5:26: "That he might sanctify and cleanse it [the church] with the
washing of water by the word." I Cor. 6:11: "And such were some of
you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God." Tit.
3:5: "According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
regeneration and [or, even the] renewing of the Holy Ghost." John
emphasizes the issue of water and blood from the side of Jesus on
the cross, and declares, "This is he that came by water and blood,
even Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. And it
is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit is truth. And
there are three that bear witness in earth, the Spirit, and the
water, and the blood; and these three agree in one." (Jno. 20:34; I
Jno. 5:6, 8.) The Spirit bears witness both to justification and
sanctification. It is he who sanctifies and he who bears witness
with his own work in the soul. The analogy, then, between the type
and the anti-type, as to the offices respectively discharged, leads
to the conclusion that the lavers and ablutions of the temple
typified the grace of the Holy Spirit. This view is far from being
singular. It has the support of the illustrious Lightfoot. "The end
of it [the laver] was," he says, "to wash the hands and feet of the
priests; but the most ultimate end was to signify the washing and
purifying by the Spirit of grace, which is so oft called *water*in
the Scripture. And so the sprinkling of the blood of the sacrifice,
and the washing in the water of the laver, did read the two great
divinity lectures, of washing by the blood of Christ from guilt, and
by the grace of God from filthiness and pollution." [[8]](#[8]) This
witness is true, and his learning and piety render it superfluous to
cite the testimony of others to the same purpose.

*The Anointing Oil.*Is it not clear from Scripture that this
typified the Holy Spirit? Under the Old Testament economy priests,
prophets and kings were anointed. Did the anointing oil of the
temple signify that Christ would anoint himself? or rather, did it
not prefigure his anointing by the Holy Ghost? He is the Christ,
God’s anointed One, and the holy Unction was the Spirit of wisdom,
power and grace. Acts 10:38: "How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth
with the Holy Ghost and with power." This direct testimony is
sufficient. The anointing oil of the temple discharged the typical
office of prefiguring the holy Unction with which Jesus was
anointed, and who, coming from him upon all his people, teacheth
them all things. (1 Jno, 2:27.) This view also is sustained by the
authority of the distinguished scholar who has already been cited.
"The oil and anointing," he observes, "wherewith the priests and the
vessels of the Lord’s house were sanctified, did denote the Word and
the Spirit of God, whereby he sanctifieth the vessels of his
election, even persons of his choice, to his service and
acceptance." [[9]](#[9])

*The Oil in the Golden Candlestick.*Taking into view the analogy of
Scripture teaching, one cannot doubt that this oil typified the Holy
Spirit. I cite the remarks upon this point of the Rev. Patrick
Fairbairn, in his *Typology of Scripture:* [[10]](#[10]) "This
symbol has received such repeated illustration in other parts of
Scripture, that there is scarcely any room for difference of opinion
as to its fundamental import and main idea. In the first chapter of
Revelation, the image occurs in its original form, ‘the seven golden
lamps’ (not candlesticks, as in our version, but the seven lamps on
the one candlestick) are explained to mean ‘the seven churches.’
These churches, however, not as of them-selves, but as replenished
by the Spirit of God, and full of holy light and energy; and hence
in the fourth chapter of the same book we again meet with seven
lamps of fire before the throne of God, which are said to be ‘the
seven Spirits of God’—either the one Spirit of God in his varieties
of holy and spiritual working, [[11]](#[11]) or seven presiding
spirits of light fitted by that Spirit for the ministrations
referred to in the heavenly vision. Throughout Scripture, as we have
already seen in chapter three of this part, oil is uniformly taken
for a symbol of the Holy Spirit. It is so, not less with respect to
its light-giving property, as to its qualities for anointing and
refreshment; and hence the prophet Zechariah (chap. 4.) represents
the exercise of the Spirit’s gracious and victorious energy in
behalf of the church under the image of two olive trees pouring oil
into the golden candlestick, the church being manifestly imaged in
the candlestick, and the Spirit’s assisting grace in the perpetual
current of oil with which it was supplied." [[12]](#[12])

*The Feast of Pentecost.*"This festival," says Horne, in his
Introduction, [[13]](#[13]) "had a typical reference to the
miraculous effusion of the Holy Spirit upon the apostles and
first-fruits of the Christian Church on the day of Pentecost, . . .
on the fiftieth day after the resurrection of Jesus Christ." He
refers, in support of this view, to Schultz, Lamy, Lightfoot,
Michaelis, Reland and Alber.

Horne further says: [[14]](#[14]) "One of the most remarkable
ceremonies performed at this feast, in the later period of the
Jewish polity, was the libation or pouring out of water, drawn from
the fountain or pool of Siloam, upon the altar. As, according to the
Jews themselves, [[15]](#[15]) this water was an emblem of the Holy
Spirit, Jesus Christ applied the ceremony and the intention of it to
himself when he cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto
me and drink. (Jno. 7:37-39.)"

Treating of this feast, Fairbairn makes the following instructive
remarks: [[16]](#[16]) "The rite that commemorated the typical
redemption had to take precedence of anything belonging to the
coming harvest, even of the presentation of its first ripening
sheaf. But the work of redemption being finished, and the feast of
fat things so long in preparation being ready, then the freest
welcome is given to come and be satisfied with the loving-kindness
of the Lord. And Christ having suffered and been glorified, what day
could be so fitly chosen for the descent of the Holy Ghost as the
day of Pentecost? For to what end was the Spirit given? To take of
the things of Christ, and show them to Christ’s people; that is, to
turn the riches of his purchased redemption from being a treasure
laid up among the precious things of God, into a treasure received
and possessed by his people, so that they might be able to rejoice,
and call others to rejoice with them, in the goodness of his house.
Now the work of God is finished, henceforth the fruitful experience
of it among his people proceeds; and the first-fruits of the Spirit
having assuredly been given, he can never withdraw his hand till the
whole inheritance of blessing is enjoyed."

*Instrumental Music.*

In the first place, it has already been shown that neither by God’s
direction nor in the actual practice of his people in the old
dispensation were instruments of music, susceptible of modulation,
employed elsewhere in public worship than in the temple. They were
not used in the tabernacle until David was preparing to build the
temple, or in the synagogue.

In the second place, it has also been shown that whatever element of
worship was embraced in the temple-service, and was absent from that
of the synagogue, was typical in its character. This was true of
instrumental music. Therefore, as an element of the temple-worship,
it was typical.

In the third place, it has been proved that some of the elements
contained in the temple-service were typical of the Holy Spirit and
of the effects to be produced by him in the New Testament
dispensation, such as consecration, illumination, purification, and
the conversion of souls; and now,

In the fourth place, I lay down the proposition that the
instrumental music of the temple-worship was typical of the joy and
triumph of God’s believing people to result from the plentiful
effusion of the Holy Ghost in New Testament times.

It was suited to discharge such a significant office in the age in
which God saw fit to prescribe its employment as a part of a typical
ritual. It produces an exhilaration of the senses, and that is about
all that it does produce. We have seen that the Israelites, like all
other peoples, employed it in their national and secular rejoicings.
Now, the Mosaic dispensation was not peculiarly a dispensation of
the Spirit. It is a distinctive glory of the Christian economy that
it is "the ministration of the Spirit." "But," says Paul, "we speak
the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which God
ordained before the world unto our glory: which none of the princes
of this world knew: for had they known it, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory. But as ii is written, Eye hath not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the
things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath
revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all
things, yea, the deep things of God." 1 Cor. 2:7-10. This
revelation, partially made in the old dispensation, is far more
fully unfolded even in this life in the present, and will be still
more amply and gloriously in the heavenly. "But if," also says the
same apostle, "the ministration of death, written and engraven in
stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not
steadfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his
countenance; which glory was to be done away: how shall not the
ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious? For if the
ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. For even that which
was made glorious had no glory in this respect, by reason of the
glory that excelleth." (2 Cor. 3:7-10.) In the New Testament we are
dearly taught the reason of this. It was not meet that the Holy
Spirit should be copiously poured out before the actual offering up
of the great atoning sacrifice and the entrance of the true high
priest into the heavenly holy of holies. "In the last day, that
great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man
thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that believeth on me, as
the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
living water. (But this spake he of the Spirit, which they that
believe on him should receive; for the Holy Ghost was not yet given,
because that Jesus was not yet glorified.") (Jno. 7:37-39.) As,
then, in the ancient dispensation, the veil of the temple was not
rent in twain, as the full liberty of adoption and boldness of
access into the presence of God, with the assurance of faith and
hope, which makes heaven begin on earth, were not granted to the
worshipper, it pleased God to typify the spiritual joy to spring
from a richer possession of the Holy Spirit through the sensuous
rapture engendered by the passionate melody of stringed instruments
and the clash of cymbals, by the blare of trumpets and the ringing
of harps. It was the instruction of his children in a lower school,
preparing them for a higher. Meanwhile, it must not be forgotten,
they were habitually recalled, even in that dispensation, by the
simpler and more spiritual worship of their weekly assemblies, to a
service of God which, as it had always existed in the past,
contained in itself a prophecy of permanence through the whole
future development of the church.

That the instrumental music of the temple, which, as we have seen,
was introduced into its services only by express divine warrant, was
typical, and therefore temporary, is further proved by the fact that
it was not practised in the apostolic church. This, it is true,
remains to be established in the progress of the argument, but it is
so generally admitted that it may here be assumed. Most certainly if
the King and Law-giver of the church had intended that kind of music
to accompany its singing of praise under the New Testament, he would
have instructed its inspired organizers to that effect. That they
did not sanction it is evidence that he did not command it, and that
in turn proves that it was designed to be merely typical during the
continuance of the temple-worship.

Now, it must have been typical, either of Christ in his person or
offices, or of the use of instrumental music by the church in
the-New Testament dispensation or some other outward action, or of
the Holy Spirit in his person or offices, or of an effect produced
by his grace. There is no other supposition I can think of. There is
no conceivable sense in which it could have typified the person or
offices of Christ. There is no sense in which it is supposable that
it typified any other external action of the church than the use of
instrumental music. It could not have typified the use of
instrumental music itself, for that would involve the absurdity of a
thing typifying itself—of an identity of the representation with the
thing represented, of a type with its antitype. We cannot imagine
any way in which it could have typified either the invisible person
or the offices of the Holy Ghost. We are shut up, then, to the
position that it was typical of an effect to be produced by the
grace of the divine Spirit; and I but echo the opinion of eminent
and godly divines in maintaining that it was designed to be a type
of that spiritual and triumphant joy which is engendered by the
plentiful effusion of the Holy Ghost upon believers under the
Christian dispensation. The Spirit having been poured out, and that
abundant joy of believers having been experienced, the shadow gave
way to the substance, the type to the antitype.

In order to evince the fact that this view is not novel or singular,
I adduce the testimony of a few distinguished theologians, showing,
in general, that instrumental music was typical, and, in particular,
that it was typical of the graces of the Holy Spirit.

"To sing the praises of God upon the harp and psaltery," says
Calvin, "unquestionably formed a part of the training of the law and
of the service of God under that dispensation of *shadows and
figures;* but they are not now to be used in public thanksgiving."
[[17]](#[17]) He says again: "With respect to the *tabret, harp, and
psaltery,*we have formerly observed, and will find it necessary
afterwards to repeat the same remark, that tile Levites, under the
law, were justified in making use of instrumental music in the
worship of God; it having been his will to train his people, while
they were yet tender and like children, by such rudiments until the
coming of Christ. But now, when the clear light of the gospel has
dissipated the *shadows*of the law and taught us that God is to be
served in a simpler form, it would be to act a foolish and mistaken
part to imitate that which the prophet enjoined only upon those of
his own time." [[18]](#[18]) He further observes: "We are to
remember that the worship of God was never understood to consist in
such outward services, which were only necessary to help forward a
people as yet weak and rude in knowledge in the spiritual worship of
God. A difference is to be observed in this respect between his
people under the Old and under the New Testament; for now that
Christ has appeared, and the church has reached full age, it were
only to bury the light of the gospel should we introduce the
*shadows*of a departed dispensation. From this it appears that the
Papists, as I shall have occasion to show elsewhere, in employing
instrumental music cannot be said so much to imitate the practice of
God’s ancient people as to ape it in a senseless and absurd manner,
exhibiting a silly delight in that worship of the Old Testament
which was *figurative,*and terminated with the gospel."
[[19]](#[19])

"The first question," says Ames (Amesius) in his *Church
Ceremonies,* [[20]](#[20]) was, If the primitive church had such
chaunting idol-service, as is in our cathedral churches. The
Rejoinder [Dr. Burgess] after some words spent about singing (about
which he bringeth not the least resemblance of that in question,
until the fourth age [century] after Christ) excepteth first, That
organall music was God’s ordinance in the Old Testament, and that
not significant, or typicall; and therefore is sinfully called idol
service . . . . To this I say (1), That his denying of organall
music to have been *significant or typicall*is without reason, and
against the current of our divines [N.B.]; taken, as it may seeme,
out of Bellarmine (*On the Mass,*B. 2, C. 15), who useth this
evasion against those words of P. Martyr: ‘Musicall organs perteyne
to the Jewish ceremonie, and agree no more to us than circumcision.’
So that we may neglect it, and take him as saying, that nothing
which was ordained in the Old Testament (no, not sacrificing of
beasts) is now an idol-service."

Yet, Bellarmin, who is here referred to by Ames as evading the
judgment of Peter Martyr, himself expresses the same judgment in
another place. [[21]](#[21]) "Justinus," he observes, "saith that
the use of instruments was granted to the Jews for their
imperfection, and that therefore such instruments have no place in
the church. We [Bellarmin and the Catholics] confess indeed that the
use of musical instruments agreeth not alike with the perfect and
with the imperfect, and that therefore they began but of late to be
admitted into the church." Bellarmin lived from 1542 to 1621.

This last mentioned opinion of tile great polemic Cardinal had been
previously expressed by Thomas Aquinas, the angelic doctor of the
Church of Rome, in his *Summa Theologica.* [[22]](#[22])
"Instruments of music," he says, "such as harps and psalteries, the
church does not adopt for divine praises, lest it should seem to
Judaize." "Instruments of this sort more move the mind to delight,
than form internally a good disposition. Under the Old Testament,
however, there was some utility in such instruments, both because
the people were more hard and carnal, and needed to be stirred up by
instruments of this kind as by promises of earthly good, and also
because material instruments of this sort *figured*something."

"It is evident," says Zwingle, [[23]](#[23]) "that that same
ecclesiastical chanting and roaring in our temples (scarce also
understood of the priests themselves) is a most foolish and vain
abuse, and a most pernicious let to piety. In the solemn worship of
God, I do not judge it more suitable than if we should recall the
incense, tapers and other *shadow of the law*into use. I say again,
to go beyond what we are taught is most wicked pervicacity."

Voetius, in his great work, the *Ecclesiastical Polity,*elaborately
argues against the use of instrumental music in the Christian
church, and among the arguments which he advances employs this:
"Because it savors of Judaism, or a worship suited to a childish
condition under the Old Testament economy; and there might with
equal justice be introduced into the churches of the New Testament
the bells of Aaron, the silver trumpets of the priests, the horns of
the Jubilee, harps, psalteries and cymbals, with Levitical singers,
and so the whole cultus of that economy, or the beggarly elements of
the world, according to the words of the apostle in the fourth
chapter of Galatians." [[24]](#[24])

Suicer, in his *Thesaurus,*[[25]](#[25]) argues at length to
vindicate Clement of Alexandria from the representation that he
favored the use of instruments in the church, and to show that he
and Isidore of Pelusium regarded the instrumental music of the Old
Testament as typical of the joyful praise of the New Testament
church for the rich benefits of an accomplished redemption. He cites
a canon of one of the Councils of Carthage to this effect: "On the
Lord’s day let all instruments of music be silenced;" and remarks
that but few in his own time favored the use of instruments in the
church.

George Gillespie, in his *Assertion of the Government of the Church
of Scotland,* [[26]](#[26]) a says: "The Jewish Church, not as it
was a church but as it was Jewish, had an High Priest, typifying our
great High Priest, Jesus Christ. As it was Jewish, it had musicians
to play upon harps, psalteries, cymbals and other musical
instruments in the temple."

David Calderwood, the author of the celebrated work, *Altare
Damascenum (Altar of Damascus)*and of a valuable History of the
Church of Scotland, says in his book, *The Pastor and the
Prelate:*[[27]](#[27]) "The *Pastor*loveth no music in the house of
God but such as edifieth, and stoppeth his ears at instrumental
music, as serving for the pedagogy of the untoward Jews under the
law, and being *figurative*of that spiritual joy whereunto our
hearts should be opened under the gospel. The *Prelate*loveth carnal
and curious singing to the ear, more than the spiritual melody of
the gospel, and therefore would have antiphony and organs in the
cathedral kirks, upon no greater reason than other *shadows*of the
law of Moses; or lesser instruments, as lutes, citherus and pipes
might be [to be] used in other kirks."

"As good an argument," remarks Dr. James Begg, "can he made for the
use of incense, priests, sacrifices, indeed of the whole temple
system, as for the use of instrumental music in Christian worship."
[[28]](#[28])

Dr. Killen, in his *Ancient Church,*says: [[29]](#[29]) "As the
sacrifices, offerings and other observances of the temple, as well
as the priests, the vestments, and even the building itself, had an
emblematic meaning, it would appear that the singing, intermingled
with the music of various instruments of sound, was also typical and
ceremonial."

In a striking argument against the use of instrumental music in the
worship of the Christian church, the Rev. Dr. Alexander Blaikie, an
American minister, says: [[30]](#[30])"These [musical instruments]
continued in the temple-service of Jehovah so long as ‘the first
tabernacle was yet standing,’ and no longer; for so soon as the way
into the holiest of all was made manifest (Heb. 9:8,) the bondage
(beloved by ever), Jew) of these ‘weak and beggarly elements’ was in
the worship of God forever done away. He, ‘in whom dwelleth all the
fulness of the Godhead bodily,’ took the whole ‘hand-writing of
ordinances out of the way, nailing it to his Cross.’ Instruments of
music in the worship of God had there fulfilled their mission, in
common with the blood of bulls, of goats, and the ashes of heifers,
and they finished their course when Jesus died. No blast of
‘rams’-horns,’ nor other ‘things without life-giving sound’ had any
longer a place with acceptance in the worship of Jehovah. The
ceremonial, sensual, and ritual in his worship there forever ceased
to be appointed by and acceptable to God, when he who ‘spake as
never man spake’ exclaimed, ‘It is finished.’"

In his reply to the statement of the Rev. Dr. Ritchie, submitted to
the Presbytery of Glasgow in favor of the introduction of an organ
in St. Andrew’s.church, Glasgow (the case was decided in May, 1808,
adversely to Dr. Ritchie), the Rev. Dr. Porteous remarks: "It seems
to be acknowledged by all descriptions of Christians, that among the
Hebrews instrumental music in the public worship of God was
essentially connected with sacrifice—with the morning and evening
sacrifice, and with the sacrifices to be offered up on great and
solemn days. But as all the sacrifices of the Hebrews were
completely abolished by the death of our blessed Redeemer, so
instrumental music . . . being so intimately connected with
sacrifice, and belonging to a service which was ceremonial and
typical must be abolished with that service; and we can have no
warrant to recall it into the Christian church, any more than we
have to use other abrogated rites of the Jewish religion, of which
it is a part." [[31]](#[31])

That able and judicious theologian, Dr. Ridgley, speaks very
expressly, not only of the typical nature of the instrumental music
employed in the temple, but of that which it was designed to typify.
He says: "It may be observed, that how much soever the use of
musical instruments which were in this worship may be concluded to
be particularly adapted to that dispensation, as they were typical
of that spiritual joy which the gospel church should obtain by
Christ; yet the ordinance of singing remains a duty, as founded on
the moral law." [[32]](#[32])

To the objection that "those arguments that have been taken from the
practice of the Old Testament church to prove singing an ordinance
may, with equal justice, be alleged to prove the use of instrumental
music," he replies: "Though we often read of music being used in
singing the praises of God under the Old Testament, yet if what has
been said concerning its being a type of that spiritual joy which
attends our praising God for the privilege of that redemption which
Christ has purchased be true, then this objection will appear to
have no weight, since this type is abolished together with the
ceremonial law." [[33]](#[33])

I have heard the view maintained that the reason why this music was
not in use in the synagogue worship was that it would have involved
a violation of the law commanding the Sabbath day to be kept holy;
that it required a species of labor which, as it was not necessary,
would have violated the commandment enjoining abstinence from all
unnecessary work on that day. And in support of this view, it is
claimed that instrumental music was permitted, and was actually
employed on the week-days between the Sabbaths. In reply I would
say:

In the first place, the allegation, that instrumental music was used
on week-days in the synagogue before the Christian dispensation
began, needs to be confirmed. The fact that such a practice now
exists, or has existed for a long time, proves nothing. The
rationalism and indifferentism of many of the modern Jews would be
sufficient to account for the fact, just as that heterodox temper
affords an explanation of the employment of organs in the
synagogue-worship even on the Sabbath.

In the second place, if the allegation were true, it would establish
nothing in opposition to the view maintained in this discussion.
For, during the Mosaic dispensation, the Jews ever manifested a
tendency to disobey divine commands and contemn divine ordinances,
in the assertion of their own will and the gratification of their
own taste—a disposition which frequently incited them to flagrantly
idolatrous worship. And although, after the Babylonian captivity
open idolatry ceased, the same disposition continued, and called
forth the rebuke administered by Christ to the Scribes and Pharisees
for making void the commandments of God by human traditions. The
oral law overlay the written, tradition superseded the Bible.

Furthermore, it may be questioned, whether this reputed worship of
small numbers of persons in a synagogue on the days of the week
could be put into the category of solemn, formal, public worship,
such as that which obtained on Sabbath days.

In the third place, it is admitted that instrumental music was not
employed in the synagogue on the Sabbath. The reason assigned is,
that it would have infringed the law of the Sabbath requiring a
cessation of all unnecessary work. Now, the question arises, how, in
view of that law, it was employed in the temple on the Sabbath? The
answer given is, that God, in that case, by his authority relaxed
the rigor of the fourth commandment, and warranted work which
otherwise would have been unjustifiable. I rejoin:

A relaxation of the Sabbatic law, in favor of the temple-services,
is not granted. Whatever was necessary or proper, according to God’s
appointment, in order to the observance of his worship, was provided
for in that law. It was not requisite for God to dispense with his
own authority to secure compliance with it.

Further, if, according to the supposition, God relaxed his law in
one case, the question is, Why did he not relax it in the other? If
for the temple, why not for the synagogue? The same authority was
sufficient for the relaxation in the latter case as well as in the
former.

But this hypothesis of a relaxation of the law being discharged, the
question returns, Why was not instrumental music employed on the
Sabbath in the synagogue as well as in the temple? The answer is,
Because God did not so command. He commanded it to be used in the
temple; he did not, as he might have done, command it to be used in
the synagogue. Now, why? There must be an adequate reason for the
difference. What was it? The only reply which appears to furnish a
solution of the difficulty is, that the temple-worship was typical,
that of the synagogue not. The employment of types in the synagogue
would have contradicted the very idea of the temple. The reason of
the singular and exceptional existence of the latter was that it
embraced a typical service. To have made the types common would
therefore have subverted the temple.

The argument may be made still clearer by testing it upon the
instance of sacrifices. They were offered at the temple on the
Sabbath. Why were they not offered in the synagogue on that day?
Will the Jew himself contend that the reason was that the law of the
Sabbath would have been violated? He himself will concede that
sacrifices, as typical, could only have been offered at the temple.
If he deny, he denies the meaning of sacrifices and the genius of
the Jewish religion. So was it with all the types, including
instrumental music. Would he say that sacrifices were permissible in
the synagogue on other than Sabbath days? Would he say that such a
practice ever actually obtained? He must find, then, another reason
why sacrifices were not offered in the synagogue on the Sabbath,
than the infraction of the Sabbatic law which they would have
involved. The same argument holds good in relation to instrumental
music. But the question here is with the Jew, and the attempt to
convince him, without the concurrence of almighty grace, would be as
operative as an effort to reduce Gibraltar with an argument.

It has been proved by this special line of argument that, in
consequence of the absence of a divine command justifying its use,
instrumental music was not included in the synagogue-worship; that,
as Christ, the procurer of redemption, was promised, so also the
Holy Spirit, the applier of redemption, was promised, in the Old
Testament—that a whole salvation by blood and by water was revealed
in its didactic statements, its prophecies, and its types; that the
elements in the temple service, which were not embraced in that of
the synagogue, were typical; that some of these were typical of the
Holy Ghost and the effects to be produced by his grace in New
Testament times; and that among them instrumental music must be
classed. From all this it follows, first, that to bring over into
the new dispensation the features of worship which belonged to the
temple, and not to the synagogue, is more unwarrantable in us than
the importation of the distinctive elements of the temple-worship
into the synagogue would have been to the Jews; secondly, that, as
the types of the Holy Spirit in the temple-service are fulfilled in
his application to believers of the benefits of a purchased
redemption, to retain them in the Christian church is as much to
dishonor him as to retain bloody sacrifices would dishonor Christ;
and thirdly, that therefore, as instrumental music in the
temple-worship was one of those types, its employment in the public
services of the Christian church is at once unwarrantable and
dishonoring to the ever-blessed Spirit.

​4. To all this argument derived from the Old Testament it is
triumphantly objected that the Psalms exhort all men to praise God
with instruments of music, and that they were designed to be sung in
every age of the church. The objection is as futile as it is
popular.

In the first place, why did not David, who was one of the principal
authors of the Psalms, introduce at an earlier period than he did
instrumental music into the tabernacle worship? The reply is, that
he was not divinely commanded to do it. Why did not Moses, who was
an accomplished psalmist, and who heard the thrilling sound of
timbrels in the great rejoicing over the discomfited host of Pharaoh
on the shore of the Red Sea, incorporate this kind of music as an
accompaniment of singing into that worship? The answer is, Because
he had no divine warrant for such a measure. We have seen that
David, by divine command, prepared instruments of music, and
directed them to be used in the temple when that edifice should be
erected. He would have had no right to take that step had he not
been inspired and commanded to do so by God, who alone possessed the
prerogative to dictate the mode in which he should be worshipped. It
deserves inquiry, too, whether any of the Psalms which are ascribed
to David, in which musical instruments are mentioned, have any
reference to their employment in the public worship of God’s house.
Let those who are wont to plead the authority of his name examine
the 57^th^, 108^th^, and 144^th^ Psalms, and discover in them, if
they can, anything more than references to his individual worship.
The 81^st^ is attributed to Asaph, and may well have been composed
after the dedication of the temple.

It may also be observed, while this Psalm is under notice, that the
argument derived from it in favor of the early use of musical
instruments by the Israelites has no value. The words are: "Take a
psalm, and bring hither the timbrel, the pleasant harp with the
psaltery. Blow up the trumpet in the new moon, in the time
appointed, on our solemn feast day. For this was a statute for
Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob. This he ordained in Joseph
for a testimony, when he went out through the land of Egypt." The
statute, law, ordinance here mentioned manifestly relates especially
to the feast of the Passover, which, when it occurred at the new
moon, was attended with the solemn blowing of trumpets, as the
parallel passage shows: Ex. 13:8, 9, 14-16. If this is not deemed
satisfactory, let the statute, law or ordinance be pointed out which
enforced the use of timbrels, harps and psalteries upon the
Israelites in connection with their exodus from Egypt. Until that is
done loose assertion will avail nothing.

The ninety-second Psalm is anonymous, and refers to individual
worship. The fifty-third, which is anonymous, does not necessarily
relate to public worship. The ninety-eighth, one hundred and
forty-ninth and one hundred and fiftieth are also anonymous, and,
while they summon all creatures to praise God, cannot be proved to
have reference to the public worship of his house. But if they do,
so far as they inculcate the use of instruments they relate to a
ceremonial and typical worship.

Unless, therefore, the temple-worship, in which alone that sort of
music as an accompaniment of singing in public worship was divinely
authorized, can be legitimately brought over into the New Testament
dispensation, the appeal to the Psalms in favor of instruments in
the public worship of the Christian church is destitute of the
slightest force.

In the second place, the argument from the Psalms proves too much,
and is therefore worthless. In the fifty-first Psalm, which has been
in all ages since its incorporation into the sacred canon a vehicle
for expressing the penitential confessions of God’s people, David
prays: "Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I
shall be whiter than snow." The hyssop dipped into the blood of the
paschal lamb was used to sprinkle the lintels and door-posts of the
Israelites, as a token of their salvation from the doom which
impended over the first-born of Egypt, and as a type of a greater
deliverance to be afterwards accomplished by God’s appointed Lamb.
(Ex. 12:21-24.) It was also employed in connection with the
cleansing of the leper (Lev. 14.), and with the burnt-sacrifice of
the red heifer without the camp. (Num. 19.) In the fiftieth Psalm,
the Lord, addressing Israel, says: "I will not reprove thee for thy
sacrifices or thy burnt-offerings to have been continually before
me;" and in the conclusion of the fifty-first, David, after praying
that God would do good in his good pleasure to Zion, and build the
walls of Jerusalem, exclaims: "Then shalt thou be pleased with the
sacrifices of righteousness, with burnt-offering and whole
burnt-offering: then shall they offer bullocks upon thine altar."
While these passages partly refer to individual cleansing, it cannot
be denied that they, far more clearly than those cited in favor of
instrumental music, relate to the public worship of God’s house. If,
now, the argument holds good, which is derived from the Psalms in
support of the use of instruments in the public worship of the
Christian church, it equally holds in justification of the offering
of bloody sacrifices in that worship. The absurdity of the
consequence completely refutes the argument.

The only way in which I can conceive that an attempt may be made to
evade the point of this fatal consideration, is by maintaining that
the sacrifices of the ancient worship were types which have been
abolished in consequence of their fulfilment by Christ, the great
expiatory sacrifice, but that instrumental music was not typical,
and therefore remains. One can now see why the preceding argument,
to prove the typical character of instrumental music as a part of
the temple worship, was so elaborately pressed, and sustained by so
long a *catena*of authorities. If that argument was conclusive, this
method of escape is nothing worth. Only what was generic, essential,
permanent in the worship of God’s ancient people passes over into
the new economy; what was specific, accidental, temporary has
vanished with the old; and it has been shown by conclusive proofs
that to the latter kind of worship instrumental music must be
assigned. It was a temporary environment by which it pleased God to
surround the singing of his praise, and as typical it has been
stripped away by its fulfilment in the copious effusion of the Holy
Spirit, and the glorious effects of his grace in applying the
accomplished atonement of Christ. We are Christians. Jews we are, if
believers, "inwardly," as Paul declares; Jews as we are the
spiritual seed of Abraham, and partake of his faith, as we possess,
at least are entitled to possess, and possess more fully, the
benefits of that unchanging covenant of grace which, in its
*essential*provisions was administered in the Patriarchal and Mosaic
dispensations, is administered in the Christian, and will, in the
Heavenly, be administered "throughout all ages, world without end."
Jews we are not, as says the same apostle, "outwardly:" Jews, not;
by carnal descent or national lineage, not as bound by the positive
enactments of the ceremonial law, not as subject to the
*accidental*provisions, the specific, peculiar, typical elements
which constituted the temporary shell of that immutable covenant.

This argument; from the Old Testament Scriptures proves vastly too
much. Those who have most urgently insisted upon it; have acted with
logical consistency in importing priests into the New Testament
church; and as priests suppose sacrifices, lo, the sacrifice of the
Mass! Instrumental music may not seem to stand upon the same foot
with that monstrous corruption, but the principle which underlies
both is the same; and *that* whether We are content with a single
instrument, the cornet, the bass-viol, the organ, or go on by a
natural development to the orchestral art, the cathedral pomps, and
all the spectacular magnificence of Rome. We are Christians, and we
are untrue to Christ and to the Spirit of grace when we resort to
the abrogated and forbidden ritual of the Jewish temple.


[1] The daughters of Heman, mentioned I Chron. 25:5, were not
singers and performers on instruments in the public worship, for
they are not included in the enumeration of the courses which
follows. 

[2] *De Synag. Vetere,*Lib. I., Pars i, Chap. 10. Lightfoot on Matt.
vi. 2. See also Josephus, *Ant. Jud.,* Lib. iii., Chap. 12. [back]

[3] The orthodox Jews, even to the present day [1888], oppose its
use in the synagogue. The writer knew a congregation in Charleston,
S.C., to be rent in twain in consequence of an attempt to introduce
an organ. 

[4] "Under every preceding dispensation the sanctity of the Sabbath
had been a fundamental part of the revealed religion; the synagogue
worship goes back, possibly, to the captivity in Egypt, certainly to
the captivity in Babylon."—Breckinridge’s *Subjec. Theology,* p.
530. 

[5] See Horne’s *Introduction,*vol. ii. p. 102, for a confirmation
of this view. It is there shown to have been advocated by Josephus
and Philo, and also by Grotius, Ernesti, Whitby, Doddridge, and
Lardner. 

[6] George Gillespie says: "After the tribes were settled in the
land of promise synagogues were built in the case of an urgent
necessity, because all Israel could not come every Sabbath day to
the reading and expounding of the law in the place that God had
chosen that his name might dwell there." *Eng. Pop. Cerem.*p. 116.
[back]

[7] Let it be observed that, in making this distinction between
essential and accidental elements of worship, by the accidental are
meant elements *divinely commanded.*With the Reformed and Puritan
divines, I utterly repudiate the distinction as used by Prelatists
to justify such accidental elements as human wisdom or church
authority adds, without divine warrant, to the essential elements of
worship. [back]

[8] *Works,* Vol. ix., p. 419: London, 1823. Fairbairn takes
substantially the same view: *Typology of Scripture,*Vol. ii., pp.
212, 213. See also M’Ewen, *Types,*Bk. iii., § 3. [back]

[9] *Ibid.,*p. 440. This view is also maintained by M’Ewen,
*Types,*Bk. iii. §3. [back]

[10] Vol. ii., pp. 257, 258. [back]

[11] This is probably the true view. [back]

[12] In opposition to Fairbairn, and in agreement with the majority
of orthodox commentators, I would regard the golden candlestick as
itself a type of Christ, and the *lights*merely, the *lamps*of
revelation, as representing the Church. The oil, with Fairbairn, I
take to typify the illuminating grace of the Holy Ghost; but the
true Container of that oil is originally Christ himself, not the
church (except, perhaps, derivatively), which receives it from him
and manifests it in a world of darkness. See M’Ewen, *Types,*Bk.
iii., § 3. [back]

[13] Vol. ii., p. 126. [back]

[14] *Ibid.,*p. 127. M’Ewen strongly urges this typical significance
of the Feast of Pentecost.  [back]

[15] In confirmation of this assertion the author quotes the
following passage from the Jerusalem Talmud: "Why is it called the
place or house of drawing? Because from thence they draw the Holy
Spirit: as it is written, and ye shall draw water with joy from the
wells of salvation." [[back]](#back15)

[16] *Typol. Scrip.,* Vol. ii. p. 311. [[back]](#back16)

[17] On Ps. 71:22. [[back]](#back17)

[18] On Ps. 81:3. [[back]](#back18)

[19] On Ps. 92:1. [[back]](#back19)

[20] P. 404. [[back]](#back20)

[21] *De Bon. Operibus,* *Lib.* i. *Cap.* 17. We appeal from Philip
drunk to Philip sober—from Bellarmin the partisan to Bellarmin the
theologian. [[back]](#back21)

[22] II. ii. 2, xci., A. ii., 4, *et conclusio: Tom.*iv.,
*Ratisbonae,*1884, p. 646. [[back]](#back22)

[23] *Act. Disp.*ii. p. 106, quoted by Ames. [[back]](#back23)

[24] Lib. ii., Tract. ii., Cap. iii., Tom. i., Amstel., p. 554.
[[back]](#back24)

[25] On word, *Organ.* [[back]](#back25)

[26] Ch. iii., p. 13: *The Presbyterian’s Armory,*Vol. i.
[[back]](#back26)

[27] P. 4, *Presbyterian’s Armory,*Vol. iii. [[back]](#back27)

[28] On *the Use of Organs,*etc., p. 18. [[back]](#back28)

[29] P. 216. [[back]](#back29)

[30] *The Organ and other Musical Instruments, as noted in the Holy
Scriptures.* [[back]](#back30)

[31] Dr. Candlish, *The Organ Question,*pp. 87, 88. It may be said
in answer, that on the same ground singing ought to be abolished.
But, first, singing was not as peculiarly connected with sacrifice
as was the blowing of trumpets; secondly, that the use of
instruments was peculiar to the temple service, whereas singing was
not. The argument only holds in regard to the specific and temporary
elements of worship, not to the generic and permanent.
[[back]](#back31)

[32] *Body of Divinity,*Quest. CLIV., Vol. iv., p. 82, Philadelphia,
1815. [[back]](#back32)

[33] *Ibid.,*pp. 87, 88. [[back]](#back3


# ARGUMENT FROM THE NEW TESTAMENT.

WE have seen, by an examination of the Old Testament Scriptures,
that throughout the Mosaic dispensation this great principle exerted
a controlling influence: That whatsoever God commands is to be
observed, and that whatsoever he does not command is forbidden, so
far as the public worship of his house is concerned. Under the
operation of that principle, instrumental music, as an accompaniment
of the singing of praise, was excluded from the tabernacle during
almost the whole period of its existence, and from the synagogue,
and was introduced into the temple in consequence of a divine
warrant expressly furnished to that effect. We come now to the
consideration of the New Testament, and the question is, Has Christ,
the King of the church, prohibited the introduction of instrumental
music into its public worship? That he has will be maintained on the
following grounds:

​1. What was peculiar and distinctive in the worship of the Jewish
temple has been abolished.

This has been the general view of the Christian church, but it has
been ridiculed by infidels and opposed, in part, by some prelatists:
ridiculed by the former because it supposes a change of divine
enactments and infers the admission of God’s mutability; [[1]](#[1])
opposed by the latter, because they seek justification for
introducing into the Christian church a class of officers and an
order of worship which belonged alone to the Jewish temple. It is
somewhat curious that this question is but rarely discussed in
systems of theology and histories of the church. It will, therefore,
not be gratuitous to state some of the reasons which justify the
view, that what was peculiar to the temple-worship has been
abrogated. This may be inferred from—

(1.) The nature of the case. It is conceded that some of the
elements of the temple-service were typical. While the Jew denies
that they have met their fulfilment in their corresponding
antitypes, the Christian affirms. The latter, consequently, must
hold that the types, not as objects of study, but as elements of
religion to be observed, have passed away. The anti-types, as
substantial realities approaching in the future, cast their shadows
before them. They were dimly outlined in those shadows. When, in the
process of time, the substances themselves were reached, what need
was there for further following the guidance of the shadows? To take
another view, indicated also by Scripture, the types were prophecies
and promises presented concretely, and not merely in words, to the
ancient worshipper. They were real manifestations, in the phenomenal
sphere, of the purpose of redemption and of the sure Word of
prophecy. But the things prophesied and promised have been actually
accomplished, and are now in the possession of the Christian
worshipper. History in part, and in part a continuous present
experience, have taken the place of prophecy and promise. Once more,
the peculiar elements of the temple-service were figurative
representations of future realities, of realities not known by
experience. What need of the figures when the real objects figured
are experimentally known? A surveyor’s plat or a topographical map
is of utmost value to one who expects to purchase, but cannot
inspect, a tract of land. When he is in actual possession of it, he
gazes upon it with his own eyes, and the map is no longer a
necessity. A likeness of a person whom one has never seen, but
desires to see, is precious until actual acquaintance ensues. Why
study the picture when one looks into the face of the person
himself? From the nature of the case, then, the distinctive elements
of the temple-worship have passed away. They have expired by their
own limitation.

(2.) The statements of Scripture. Let us follow the order of the New
Testament writings, and select some of the testimonies which they
furnish.

First, We encounter the song of Simeon, who, when he had taken the
infant Jesus into his arms, "blessed God, and said, Lord, now
lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: for
mine eyes have seen thy salvation;" and the words of the prophetess
Anna, who "gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spake of him
[Jesus] to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem."

Secondly, The Baptist, pointing to Jesus as with the index-finger of
the old economy, exclaimed, "Behold, the Lamb of God, which taketh
away the sin of the world." Look! there he is, God’s provided and
appointed Lamb, the great atoning sacrifice, who was typified by
every lamb sacrificed at the tabernacle and the temple.

Thirdly, "Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have
found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the Prophets, did write,
Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph." And when Nathanael, convinced
of his Messiahship, uttered the confession, "Rabbi, thou art the Son
of God; thou art the King. of Israel," Jesus received the confession
and confirmed the testimony.

Fourthly, "After that John was put in prison, Jesus came into
Galilee, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, and saying, The
time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand." Again he
said, "Neither do men put new wine into old bottles: else the
bottles break, and the wine runneth out, and the bottles perish: but
they put new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved;" by
which he evidently taught that, as the new dispensation was about to
begin, its spirit would transcend the forms of the old, and
necessitate their abrogation. In his dying words, "It is finished,"
Jesus, in actually fulfilling the types of the old economy,
pronounced them abolished. His whole mediatorial work on earth was
completed, and all the figures of it were superceded by the reality.
After his resurrection, in rebuke of the unbelief of his disciples,
he said, "O fools and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets
have spoken: ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to
enter into his glory? And beginning at Moses, and all the prophets,
he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning
himself."

There are three aspects in which the necessity which Christ here
affirms for his sufferings and glorification may be regarded. First,
there was an absolute necessity, on the supposition of a free
determination on God’s part to save sinners, that a competent
atonement for their guilt should ground their reconciliation to him,
consistently with his infinite perfections—his justice, truth and
holiness. Secondly, there was a necessity that the legal substitute
who would die for the expiation of guilt should be a priest, not
only to evince with perfect clearness his own free and cheerful
susception of the great undertaking, and to be qualified by actual
experience to sympathize with his people in suffering, but also to
provide, by the offices of an infinitely meritorious Minister of
worship, for the access of sinners to God, and the acceptance of
their prayers and their praises. But, thirdly, there was a necessity
for a fulfilment of the types and prophecies of the Old Testament,
and there can be but little doubt that it was chiefly upon this
point that the Lord Jesus insisted, in his talk with the disciples
on their way to Emmaus. The legal and ceremonial institutions of
Moses and the promissory writings of the prophets he expounded as
having had reference to himself, and therefore virtually declared
that they had all been fulfilled, so far as they related to his
sufferings and atoning work, or were in process of fulfilment, so
far as they pointed to his entrance into his glory—his ascension to
heaven, his session on the throne, his intercession, his
communication of the Holy Spirit, and his second coming to complete
the redemption of his people and to judge the quick and the dead.
But a promise fulfilled ceases to be a promise, and a type realized
in its antitype is a type no more: its prospective office
necessarily expires. It is evident, therefore, from the discourse
ascribed by the evangelist to our Lord, that the peculiar and
distinctive elements of the temple-worship, so far as they figured a
future atonement by priestly sacrifice, had been abrogated, and so
far as they represented a future effusion of the Holy Ghost soon
would be abrogated.

Fifthly, On the day of Pentecost Peter declared that the wonderful
outpouring of the Holy Spirit which was then experienced was in
fulfilment of a prophecy of Joel. That fulfilment the apostolic
preacher explained by saying: "This Jesus hath God raised up,
whereof we are all witnesses. Therefore being by the right hand of
God exalted, and having received of the rather the promise of the
Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this which ye do now see and hear."
Now, not only were the death and glorification of Christ conjoined
with the effusion of the Spirit in the prophecies, but they were
also associated with each other in the temple types. Both classes of
prospective representations, the prophetical and the typical, in
this their twofold significance, were fulfilled. We have seen,
moreover, that the feast of Pentecost, which was a constituent
element of the temple-services, was typical of the copious effusion
of the Holy Spirit, and it was precisely on the day of Pentecost
that it met a conspicuous fulfilment. What are we to conclude, but
that as the types of Christ’s death and exaltation had necessarily
expired, the same was true of those which pre-figured the outpouring
of the Holy Ghost? In answer to this it may be said that the
prophecy cited by Peter had only a partial, however glorious,
fulfilment on the day of Pentecost, and continues to be a prediction
of copious effusions of the Spirit, and so the temple-services which
bear upon the same continuous impartation of his grace may be
legitimately employed until the consummation shall be reached. What
is true of the prophecies may be true of the types.

But, in the first place, the same would hold good with reference to
the continued prosecution of Christ’s intercessory work in heaven.
Now, that was certainly typified by the high-priestly offering of
incense in the Jewish holy of holies. The argument, if worth
anything, would avail to show that the typical representations of
Christ’s intercession may still be retained in the church. What
would be the consequence? This: that so much of the temple-service
as typified the sacrificial death of Christ was abrogated and has
vanished, and so much as pertained to his intercession, as not yet
completed, may still be legitimately employed. That is to say, a
service which God made one great whole, may now, at the discretion
of the church, be divided in twain—a part discarded and a part
retained. No sober Protestant mind could possibly entertain such a
view. No more, for like reasons, could it tolerate a retention of
those typical services which foreshadowed the continuous effusion of
the Holy Ghost. Either the whole temple-service or none: these are
the alternatives to which the Christian church was reduced. It
elected the latter, and it has been reserved for Rome and the
high-church Prelatists who agree with her to pursue a middle course,
and not presuming to retain bloody sacrifices, to divorce what God
had joined together, and to perpetrate the solemn mockery of a
mutilated temple ritual.

In the second place, the temple itself was a type of Christ and his
mediatorial work. But it has fulfilled its typical office, and has
ceased to exist. To retain a part of its services is to suppose the
continued existence of the temple, for God never authorized the
employment of those services except in immediate connection with
that particular structure, after the tabernacle had given way to it
by his inspired direction. The force of this consideration is
acknowledged by the Jews themselves, who do not pretend to offer
bloody sacrifices elsewhere. If the cathedral takes the place of the
temple, we would have many sacred edifices, in many different
places, substituted for the only temple which existed by divine
appointment, to which the tribes of Israel and proselytes from
distant countries repaired to celebrate the great typical festivals.
If we may have but one substitute for it, which one? Shall it be St.
Peter’s? And must all the world go to that mountain to worship, when
Jesus Christ has said that neither at Mount Gerizim nor at Mount
Moriah will men be obliged to worship? Jesus has thus declared that
the positive enactment which required ceremonial worship at the
Jewish temple is abrogated; and the New Testament is utterly silent
in regard to any transfer to the Christian church of the services
peculiar to that edifice.

In the third place, although the prophecies contained in the Old
Testament taught a continuous communication of the Spirit until the
complete establishment of Christ’s mediatorial kingdom on earth, yet
they themselves were finished when they were uttered. So with the
types foreshadowing the same thing. We might as warrantably add to
those prophecies new predictions because they have not had a
consummate fulfilment, as continue to employ the types because they
have not had an exhaustive realization. Both sorts of prospective
representations were limited by God’s will, and the attempt to
reinstitute either, or to continue either, by the will of man, would
be to invade God’s prerogative and to disobey God’s authority.

In the fourth place, the effusion of the Holy Spirit has already in
the past been in part enjoyed by the church, and is in part now
enjoyed by the church, and to perpetuate services which typify it,
would be at one and the same time to confound a type which has
reference to the future with a symbol commemorating the past, and to
observe the type at the very time that the anti-type is actually
manifested. In either case contradiction and absurdity would result.
The truth is, that the glorious, though partial, fulfilment of the
prophecies and types alike of the old dispensation constitutes a
pledge, definite and sufficient, of their exhaustive fulfilment in
the future. If it be said that the New Testament contains prophecies
of its own touching the future progress of Christ’s kingdom, the
reply is easy, that they were finished and sealed up with the
completion of the sacred canon, and that unless the church has the
right, furnished by fresh inspiration, to create substantive
additions to the Scriptures which God pronounces perfect, she has no
authority to utter prophecies, in the strict sense, any more; and it
may be asked, where are the types peculiar to the New Testament? Are
we pointed to baptism and the Lord’s supper? Let it be proved that
they are types at all; and if that could be proved, all that would
be established is that the church is restricted to them alone, and
the plea for sacerdotal ritual of typical services would be cut up
by the roots.

To all this it may be answered, that what is contended for is that
the Christian church is warranted by the observance of services
analogous to those of the Jewish temple to *commemorate*the past
illustrious events of her history. Where is the warrant? We have a
divine warrant for the observance of the Lord’s day. We have a
divine warrant for the observance of the two sacraments of baptism
and the Lord’s supper. What other days are we enjoined to keep holy?
What other symbolical ordinances are we commanded to observe? To
take the ground that the church has a discretionary power to appoint
other holy days and other symbolical rites is to concede to Rome the
legitimacy of her five superfluous sacraments and all her
self-devised paraphernalia of sacred festivals. There is no middle
ground. Either we are bound by the Lord’s appointments in his Word,
or human discretion is logically entitled to the full-blown license
of Rome.

Sixthly, The speech of Stephen before the Jewish Council. This
speech of the illustrious proto-martyr of the Christian church must
ever be regarded as one of the strongest scriptural proofs of the
abolition of the temple-worship; but as it will come to be
considered as one of the elements in the direct argument against the
use of instrumental music in public worship, its examination will
for the present be deferred.

Seventhly, The decree of the Synod of Jerusalem. Certain Judaizing
teachers who went from Judea to Antioch "taught the brethren, and
said, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot
be saved." This raised the whole question about conformity to the
institutions of the ceremonial law by the Christian church. That
question was referred to the decision of the apostles and elders at
Jerusalem. Paul and Barnabas were the commissioners. They laid the
case before an assembled synod. The decree of that body, which was
sent to the Gentile churches, was: "That ye abstain from meats
offered to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and
from fornication: from which if ye keep yourselves, ye shall do
well. Fare ye well." The significant absence of any allusion,
explicitly made, to the question about the ceremonial law was
manifestly equivalent to a decision that it was not necessary that
the churches should conform to the requirements of that law. It was
tantamount to a judgment that the Mosaic institutions, so far as
they were ceremonial and typical, were no longer binding. Of course,
it follows that the venerable synod regarded the observance of the
temple-worship as no longer obligatory, and discharged the Gentile
churches from the duty of adhering to any of its elements which were
distinctive of the old dispensation. [[2]](#[2]) To suppose that
those churches, after such a discharge, had discretionary power to
retain the services of the ceremonial code is to suppose that they
might, at discretion, forsake the liberty they had in Christ and
resume the yoke of Moses. The supposition is absurd. As the great
body of the Christian church has been gathered from the Gentiles,
the inference is obvious.

Eighthly, The speeches of Paul at his last visit to Jerusalem. The
charge which was brought against him was this: "This is the man that
teacheth all men everywhere against the people, and the law, and
this place." If the charge had been even partly false that he taught
against the law and the temple, Paul’s first step in his defence
would evidently have consisted in denying it. This denial he did not
make. How can the fact be accounted for, except upon the ground that
Paul was well aware that both the temple and its peculiar services
were doomed? He knew the prediction of Jesus that the building would
be destroyed, and he had special reason for remembering the defence
of Stephen before the Council, in which that servant of Christ
contended that the whole typical ritual would give way to the
sublime simplicity of worship which would characterize the new
dispensation. That Paul himself occasionally worshipped *at the
temple*was a mere matter of expediency. That he took part in its
ceremonial and typical observances there is no proof to show.
Indeed, without any assertion upon the subject, may not the question
be raised, whether, after the day of Pentecost, when the Christian
dispensation was inaugurated, the apostles did not, *as men,* commit
a mistake in worshipping at all at the temple. It is difficult to
believe that Stephen worshipped there.

Ninthly, The argument in the Epistle to the Hebrews is decisive. In
the first place, it shows that the Aaronic priests and Levitical
ministers have vanished, having been superseded by a priest after
the order of Melchizedek, who has offered a perfect sacrifice, and
lives forever to intercede for his people and consummate the work of
redemption. If there be no priests and Levites to officiate, how is
it possible to continue the services of the temple? To say that they
are succeeded by Christian ministers is flatly to contradict the
argument of the inspired writer. In the second place, the argument
expressly proves that the temple-worship has been abolished. After
stating the fact that the first covenant [that is, the Jewish
dispensation [[3]](#[3])] had "ordinances of divine service and a
worldly sanctuary," and specifying the things contained and the
offices performed in the latter, it declares that "the first
tabernacle"—and by this term the temple, as well as the tabernacle
proper, was designated—"was a figure for the time then present;" but
that Christ had come, "a high priest of good things to come by a
greater and more perfect tabernacle." The figure had been realized
in that which was figured, and consequently there was no longer any
necessity for its teaching; indeed, its teaching would be utterly
false and misleading. In the third place, the argument shows that
the ceremonial law, as a mere shadow of good things to come, was
inefficacious to provide for the removal of guilt from the
conscience and the sanctification of the soul. But these ends are
now secured by Christ through the sacrifice of himself. Now there is
no need to approach God by the old way of the temple-worship. We are
at liberty to approach him by a new and living way, which Christ
hath consecrated for us through the veil; that is to say, his flesh.
His atoning death has cancelled the necessity for the temple and all
its ceremonial and typical observances.

(3.) The providence of God settled this question. It effectually
abolished the temple and its services. The Lord Jesus, before his
death, predicted the destruction of the temple itself. Forty years
after his death the Romans destroyed it. This, it may be urged,
proved nothing as to the legitimacy of continuing its services: it
may, for aught we know, be restored. It is true that the temple was
rebuilt after the Babylonish captivity. This was accomplished upon
the expiration of seventy years only, and then by God’s direction.
The Messiah had not come, and the typical office of the temple might
still be fitly discharged. But he did come, and the rending of the
veil, when he expired, was the patent signal of the temple’s doom.
More than eighteen hundred years have elapsed since its destruction,
and it is not yet rebuilt. God has never directed its
reconstruction, but on the contrary has by his providence prevented
it when it has been attempted. The Emperor Julian, commonly called
the Apostate, made the effort, and was baffled in a most
extraordinary way. In speaking of what he terms "the miraculous
interposition of heaven, which defeated Julian’s attempt to rebuild
the Jewish temple of Jerusalem," Bishop Warburton says: "Sacrifices
constituting the essentials of their [the Jews’] worship, their
religion could not be said to exist longer than that celebration
continued. But sacrifices were to be performed in no place out of
the walls of their temple. So that when this holy place was finally
destroyed, according to the prophetical predictions, the institution
itself became abolished. Nor was anything more consonant to the
genius of this religion, than the assigning such a celebration of
its principal rites. The temple would exist while they remained a
people, and continued sovereign. And when their sovereignty was
lost, the temple-worship became precarious, and subject to the
arbitrary pleasure of their masters. They destroyed this temple: but
it was not till it had lost its use. For the rites, directed to be
there celebrated, were relative to them only as a free-policied
people.

"So that this was, in reality, a total *extinction*of the Jewish
worship. How wonderful are the ways of God! This came to pass at
that very period when a new revelation from heaven concurred with
the blind transactions of civil policy, to supersede the law by the
introduction of the gospel: the last great work which completed the
scheme of human redemption.

"To confound this admirable order of providence was what induced the
Emperor Julian to attempt the rebuilding of the Jewish temple of
Jerusalem. The vanity of the attempt could only be equaled by its
impiety; for it was designed to give the lie to God, who, by the
mouth of his prophets, had foretold that it should never be rebuilt.
Here, then, was the most important occasion for a miraculous
interposition, as it was to defeat this mad attempt. And thus in
fact it was defeated, to the admiration of all mankind.

"But as a large and full account of the whole affair hath been
already given to the public, in a work entituled—Julian, or a
Discourse concerning the Earthquake and Fiery Eruption which
defeated that Emperor’s attempt to rebuild the Temple at Jerusalem;
thither will I refer the learned reader, who will there meet with
all the various evidence of the fact, abundantly sufficient to
support and establish it; together with a full confutation of all
the cavils opposed to its certainty and necessity."

It may be pleaded, that although the temple may be irrevocably
destroyed, its priestly services may, in some sense, be transferred
in a modified form and under new conditions to the Christian church:
that the New Testament itself authorizes the offices of a
priesthood. Yes, it declares all believers to be made priests in
Christ to God, but priests, as offering eucharistic
sacrifices—sacrifices of themselves, of their prayers, and of their
substance. Nothing more need be said in rebuttal of this wretched
perversion of Scripture than that the word *priest*(iereuj) is
never, in the singular, applied in the New Testament to any merely
human officer of the church. He who assumes to be officially a
priest usurps the prerogative of Jesus Christ, and audaciously
invokes his judgment. This is sufficient in reply to sacerdotalists
who, if not already within the pale of Rome, need only to push out
their views to a legitimate conclusion in order to reach the popish
outrage of the Mass.

We must concur with Warburton in holding that the destruction of the
temple, after the death of Christ, involved the "extinction" of all
that was peculiar and characteristic in the temple-worship.

The abolition of the temple-worship, so far as it was peculiar to
the Jewish dispensation, has now been proved by an appeal to the
nature of the case, to the statements of the New Testament
Scriptures, and to the awful providence of God; and as it was before
incontestably shown that instrumental music was employed alone in
that worship, so far as the public religious services of God’s
people were concerned, it follows that that kind of music is, with
those limitations, abolished, and that its use in the Christian
church is contrary to the Word and will of God.

​2. The second argument will be derived from the reproduction by the
Christian church, under New Testament conditions, of the essential
principles of polity and worship which obtained in the Jewish
synagogue.

Let us pause to indicate briefly the elements of difference and of
similarity between the church of the new dispensation and that of
the old.

The prominent elements by which the Christian church was obviously
distinguished from the Jewish were:

(1.) The actual advent, death, resurrection, exaltation,
intercession, and mediatorial reign, of Christ; with all the
consequences which flowed from those stupendous events. The old
church looked forward to them all; the new looks backward to some of
them, contemplates others as continuing to exist, and looks ever
forward to the *second*coming of the Saviour to complete the
redemption of his people and judge the quick and the dead. Jesus is
more distinctly, than was possible to the Old Testament saints,
recognized and worshipped as the King and Head of the church, and as
the Mediatorial Sovereign to whose hands God the Father has
committed dominion over all things in heaven, earth and hell.

(2.) The influence proceeding from the copious effusion of the Holy
Spirit, and the results attending it, upon the disciples and their
fellow-believers in wonderfully increasing their gifts and graces,
and upon the mass of unbelievers in the conviction of their minds
and the conversion of their souls.

(3.) The elimination of all that was ceremonial and typical in the
old dispensation. Only two symbolical ordinances are commanded by
Christ to be observed: the sacraments of baptism and the Lord’s
supper. Simplicity is the reigning genius of worship, only such
external instrumentalities being allowed as are necessary to
constitute the media of its expression. All else, save baptism and
the Lord’s supper, is swept away.

(4.) The exaltation, accentuation and extension of the preaching
function: evangelism is made dominant in contradistinction to the
dominant conservatism of the Old Testament church,—dominant, let it
be observed, for the Jewish church was not merely and absolutely
conservative, as provision was made for the admission of proselytes
from the Gentile nations; and the Christian church is very far from
being simply evangelistic, since it is an important part of her duty
to preserve, maintain and defend the truth, and to train the sons of
God for service on earth and glory in heaven.

(5.) The emphasizing of the singing of praise in public worship.
There is reason to believe that the apostles made singing, as a
distinct and articulate part of worship, more prominent in the
Christian church than it had been in the services of the Jewish
synagogue. The reason would seem to be plain. It is the most fitting
vehicle for the utterance of gratitude and joy; and the Christian is
peculiarly called upon to express these sentiments in worship, in
consequence of the finished atonement of Christ and the out-poured
influence of the Holy Ghost.

The question next being, what elements of similarity there are
between the church under the new dispensation and that under the
old, it is obvious from what has been said in regard to the typical
and temporary character of the Jewish temple, that it could not have
constituted the pattern or model in conformity with which the
Christian church was organized. We must look elsewhere, if anywhere,
for such an ideal. We find that in the Jewish synagogue, as an
organized institute, there existed those essential elements of
polity and worship which possess the character of permanence,
elements which were destined to form the abiding attributes of the
visible church through all dispensational changes. We might,
therefore, conclude, from the very nature of the case, that such
elements would pass over by an easy transition, without the jar of
dislocation and a wholly new construction, to the church of the new
dispensation. This antecedent presumption we discover to be
confirmed by facts.

The synagogue, according to those authors, both Jewish and
Christian, who are best entitled to speak on the subject, had, as to
its polity, elders, deacons, and—I am disposed to believe—preachers.
At least, there was the germ of the preaching function which only
needed expansion to make it complete. Here were the essential
elements, which only required to be modified by New Testament
conditions to become the constituents of the polity and order of
Christian congregations. When, accordingly, the majority of a Jewish
synagogue were converted to the Christian faith, it became at once,
simply by a profession of Christianity, without any marked outward
change, a Christian church, with its officers already in existence,
and consequently not needing to be elected and ordained. In a word,
there was no necessity to create new offices. The old might need to
be modified and extended in consequence of the new relations and
conditions involved, but not to be vacated so that new offices,
another kind of offices, should be substituted for them. Hence, in
the accounts given in the Acts of the Apostles of the first
gathering of Christian churches, we have no notice of the
institution of the office of elder *ab initio.*The Jewish elders of
the synagogue became the Christian elders of the church. The same,
with the exception of the apostles and other extraordinary officers,
would seem to have been true of all the offices of the Christian
church—of preachers, and in all probability of deacons. There is no
positive proof that the appointment of the Seven was a creation of
the diaconal office. The evidence tends to an opposite conclusion.
The narrative leads naturally to the conclusion that there were,
under the superintendence of the apostles, Hebrew deacons who
attended to the distribution of the common fund contributed by the
church; and that the Seven (whose names are Hellenistic), were added
to the already existing corps of deacons, in order to still the
murmurs of the Hellenist converts and adequately meet their wants.
As this is a point only subsidiary to the argument in hand, it will
not be elaborately discussed. A considerable mass of testimonies
might be collected from learned writers who, although characterized
by different types of theological and ecclesiastical thought, have
contended that the Christian church was organized after the analogy
of the synagogue. It may be sufficient to cite the frequently quoted
remarks of one who, in view of his church relations and official
position, must be regarded as having spoken with distinguished
candor upon this subject. "It is probable," says Archbishop Whately,
[[4]](#[4]) "that one cause, humanly speaking, why we find in the
Sacred Books less information concerning the Christian ministry and
the constitution of church-governments than we otherwise might have
found, is that these institutions had less of novelty than some
would at first sight suppose, and that many portions of them did not
wholly originate with the apostles. It appears highly probable—I
might say, morally certain—that, wherever a Jewish synagogue
existed, that was brought, the whole, or the chief part of it, to
embrace the gospel, the apostles did not there so much form a
Christian church (or congregation, *ecclesia,),*as make an existing
congregation Christian, by introducing the Christian sacraments and
worship, and establishing whatever regulations were requisite for
the newly-adopted faith; leaving the machinery (if I may so speak)
of government unchanged; the rulers of synagogues, elders and other
officers (whether spiritual or ecclesiastical, or both) being
already provided in the existing institutions. And it is likely that
several of the earliest Christian churches did originate in this
way; that is, that they were converted synagogues, which became
Christian churches as soon as the members, or the main part of the
members, acknowledged Jesus as the Messiah.

"The attempt to effect this conversion of a Jewish synagogue into a
Christian church seems always to have been made, in the first
instance, in every place where there was an opening for it. Even
after the call of the idolatrous Gentiles, it appears plainly to
have been the practice of the apostles Paul and Barnabas, when they
came to any city where there was a synagogue, to go thither first
and deliver their sacred message to the Jews and ‘devout Gentiles’;
according to their own expression (Acts 13:17), ‘to the men of
Israel and those that feared God;’ adding that ‘it was necessary
that the Word of God should first be preached to them.’ And when
they founded a church in any of those cities in which (and such
were, probably, a very large majority) there was no Jewish synagogue
that received the gospel, it is likely they would still conform, in
a great measure, to the same model." In these views such men as
Grotius, Vitringa, Selden and Lightfoot concur.

If this be so, if the Christian church adopted its polity and its
ordinary officers from the Jewish synagogue, it is almost
unnecessary to argue that it appropriated its mode of worship from
the same source. It was that to which in the past the people of God
had been accustomed in their stated meetings on the Sabbath. Why
should it not have continued for all the future? This would have
been the almost inevitable result, unless the Head of the Church had
authoritatively directed a change to be made, and had prescribed
another and a different method of worship which he willed to be
observed. There is not the slightest proof to show that he did,
except in the instances of baptism and the Lord’s supper; and this
silence of Christ, and the absence of inspired direction to that
effect by the Holy Ghost, are entitled to be construed as an
approval of the continuance by the church of the long-standing and
venerable mode of worship of the Jewish synagogue. This probable
argument amounts to certainty, in view of the significant fact, that
the elements of public worship actually enumerated in the New
Testament are precisely those which existed in the synagogue. As,
then, the use of instrumental music was unknown in the worship of
the synagogue it was not introduced into the Christian church.

To this two considerations may be added: first, that the analogy
between the synagogue and the Christian church is sustained by the
fact that the LXX. frequently use the term *ecclesia*as convertible
with synagogue; and secondly, that as the temple stood and its
worship continued for many years after the first Christian churches
were constituted, the introduction into them of a kind of music
which every Jew knew to be peculiar to the temple would have
furnished in itself a reason for intense hostility to Christianity,
and have called forth a special opposition which would have left its
impress upon the records of the times, both sacred and profane. But
we hear nothing of such a conflict, and the inference is well-nigh
irresistible that the ground for it did not exist; instrumental
music had no place in the early Christian churches. This particular
consideration is, moreover, enhanced when we reflect that the Jewish
synagogues themselves passed by an easy transition into Christian
congregations. But that the converted Jew should, without
difficulty, have admitted into the synagogue, even though
christianized, an element which belonged to the temple as peculiar
and typical, or that the Christian should have adopted pmt of a
worship the abolition of which he knew to be certain, is either of
them a supposition too violent to be entertained.

​3. The third argument against the employment of instrumental music
in the Christian church will be drawn from the great speech of
Stephen before the Jewish Council.

He was altogether an extraordinary man. Endowed with great
intellectual abilities, full of faith and power and of the Holy
Ghost, he disputed with such vigor against the Libertines, Cyrenians
and Alexandrians, and them of Cilicia and Asia, that "they were not
able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spake." The
reference to Cilicia makes it highly probable that in these public
discussions he had Saul, the scholar of Tarsus and the disciple of
Gamaliel, as one of his antagonists; and it may be that the defeat
in argument to which the gifted and aspiring zealot was subjected
may have armed him with the acrimony which found so conspicuous
expression at the execution of the martyr. Not being able to cope
with him on the field of honorable debate, his adversaries resorted
to the expedient which discomfited malice is wont to suggest—they
prosecuted him before the supreme judicatory. The charge against him
was: "We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and
against God; this man ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words against
this holy place, and the law: for we have heard him say that this
Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and change the customs
which Moses delivered us." As is apt to be the case, this charge is
partly true and partly false. It was false, so far as it alleged
blasphemy against Moses and against God. So far as it affirmed
Stephen’s declaration, that the temple would be destroyed, and the
customs or rites, as ceremonial and typical, of the Mosaic code,
would be changed, it must, for two reasons, be considered true—in
the first place, because the defendant never denied that allegation;
and in the second place, because his defence itself proved its
relevancy. This construction of the charge has strong support. "This
charge," says Prof. Joseph Addison Alexander, [[5]](#[5]) "was no
doubt true, so far as it related to the doctrine that the new
religion, or rather the new form of the church, was to supersede the
old." "Down to this time," observes Dr. Arthur Penrhyn Stanley,
[[6]](#[6]) "the apostles and the early Christian community had
clung in their worship, not merely to the holy land and the holy
city, but to the holy place of the temple. This local worship, with
the Jewish customs belonging to it, he [Stephen] now denounced. So
we must infer from the accusations brought against him, confirmed as
they are by the tenor of his defence. The actual words of the charge
may have been false, as the sinister and malignant intention which
they ascribed to him was undoubtedly false. ‘Blasphemous,’ that is,
‘calumnious’ words, ‘against Moses and against God’ he is not likely
to have used. But the overthrow of the temple, the cessation of the
Mosaic ritual, is no more than St. Paul preached openly, or than is
implied in Stephen’s own speech: ‘against this holy place and the
law—that Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall
change the customs that Moses delivered us.’"

The speech, in conformity with a tendency of the oriental mind, is
cast in the framework of an historical statement, and to the cursory
reader does not present the features of an argument. It is
nevertheless a powerful argument. There are two great principles the
assertion of which it involved, and upon which it proceeded: first,
the spirituality of God; secondly, his infinite immensity. From the
first the great speaker argued that it would be folly to hold that
God could be adequately worshipped by material emblems and
ceremonial rites. From the second he derived the consequence that as
God could not be confined to one place, neither could his worship.
These positions he sustained by an appeal, in the first place, to
the history of Israel, and, in the second place, to the doctrine of
the prophets. He shows that the church-state of the Hebrews had
undergone great changes—changes which rendered it impossible that
they could have worshipped always in one particular mode, in one
particular locality, and at one particular sanctuary. The church, as
organized in the family of their great ancestor, Abraham, worshipped
without the temple. The church, while in bondage in Egypt,
worshipped without the temple. The church, in its migrations for
forty years in the wilderness, worshipped without the temple. The
church, after it had found rest in the land of promise, through the
whole period of the Judges, and through the reigns of Saul and
David, worshipped without the temple. It was not until Solomon that
the temple was built, and its peculiar services were inaugurated as
supplementary to, and perfective of, those which had belonged to the
tabernacle. Here Stephen reaches the conclusion of the first branch
of his argument—namely, that the history of the Hebrew church proved
that the temple in which his judges gloried had not been, in the
past, a necessity to the spiritual worship of God, and therefore it
involved neither absurdity nor impiety to hold that the church would
again worship without it.

He then proceeds to confirm this lesson from the Israelitish history
by the doctrine of the prophets, which teaches the greatness,
majesty, infinity of God: "Howbeit the Most High dwelleth not in
temples made with hands; as saith the prophet, Heaven is my throne,
and earth is my footstool: what house will ye build me? saith the
Lord: or what is the place of my rest? Hath not my hand made all
these things?" Evidently the argument went to show the
unreasonableness of so localizing the worship of the infinite Being
as to tie him to a single house of worship. It implicitly affirmed
the temporary character of the temple, and would, in all
probability, have made the assertion explicit had not some
manifestation of anger and pride on the part of the Council
interrupted the speaker. This led the fearless and impassioned
witness for the gospel directly to indict his judges: "Ye
stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always
resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye." It is dearly
implied that as their fathers had resisted the Holy Ghost in respect
to the matter of worshipping according to God’s appointments, so
*they* resisted him in the same manner. When, for example, the
Spirit directed their fathers to worship at the temple, they
worshipped in high places and in groves. Now that a new dispensation
had been introduced, and the Holy Ghost directed them to abandon the
temple-worship as having discharged its typical and temporary
office, they disobeyed him, and insisted upon continuing that
worship. This outburst of holy eloquence cut them to the heart and
drew from them expressions of rage. And when he declared that he saw
Jesus, whom he had charged them with having murdered, standing on
the right hand of God, it became intolerable, and resolving
themselves into a furious mob, they rushed upon him, dragged him
outside the gate of the city, and pitilessly stoned him to death.

In this speech it is clear that Stephen erected a testimony which
cost him his life in favor of the abrogation of the temple-worship;
and as instrumental music was peculiar to that worship, we have an
independent line of proof from the New Testament that it was not
introduced, and was not designed to be introduced, into the
Christian church.

There is, besides, another aspect of this immortal speech which must
not be overlooked. Stephen, endowed with extraordinary penetration
of mind, and with a wonderful inspiration of the Holy Ghost, seemed
to be in advance of the apostolic college itself in his estimate of
the genius of gospel-worship, he contended, as the Lord Jesus had
before declared, that the spirituality of God demanded spiritual
worship, and delivered a testimony sealed with blood in behalf of
the absolute simplicity of gospel institutions. Stripped of all the
burdensome though splendid ritual of the temple, they would
reproduce the simple and unostentatious services of the synagogue,
and interject nothing which was not expressly prescribed by divine
authority, or required by necessity, between the living worshipper
and the living God. *The spirituality and simplicity of
gospel-worship,*—this was what the illustrious deacon insisted upon
in burning words and with dauntless spirit before that bigoted and
furious bench of zealots; this was the principle which he saturated
with martyr blood at the very beginning of the Christian
dispensation. Would that every officer of the church would imitate
the glorious example, and in the face of popular clamor and the
demands of this world’s princes, bear an unwavering testimony
against the introduction into the public worship of the church of
*every*abrogated element of the ancient temple-services!

​4. The next proof is based upon the teaching of Christ and his
apostles—a teaching enforced by their practice.

(1.) The teaching of the Lord Jesus excluded instrumental music from
the public worship of the New Testament church, he declared that God
is vainly worshipped when the doctrines and commandments of men are
substituted for his own. We have seen that, by divine direction, by
the doctrine and commandment of God, instrumental music in the Old
Testament church was excluded from the ordinary, stated worship of
his people on the Sabbath day in the synagogue, and was confined to
the services of the temple. We have also seen that the Christian
church in its polity and worship was, under the conditions and with
the modifications necessitated by the new dispensation, modeled
after the Jewish synagogue. No entirely new element of worship was
incorporated into the services of that church. Jesus did not
authorize the effectuation of such a change. Consequently the
introduction of instrumental music, which God had not sanctioned, or
rather had prohibited, in the worship of the synagogue would have
been the substitution of a doctrine and commandment of men for those
which proceeded from God.

In his conversation with the Samaritan woman at Jacob’s well, our
Saviour enounced the great principle of the spirituality of worship:
"God is a spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in
spirit and in truth." While he acknowledged that the Jews, in
contradistinction to the Samaritans, paid intelligent worship to
God, for the reason that it involved the knowledge of salvation—a
salvation to be accomplished by One who, according to the flesh,
would spring from the Jewish stock, and while he virtually admitted
that they had complied with divine direction in conducting a
ceremonial and typical worship with its seat at Jerusalem, he added
the significant words: "Believe me, the hour cometh, when ye shall
neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father .
. . . The hour cometh and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh
such to worship him." In these words, which adumbrated the genius of
gospel-worship, our blessed Lord clearly taught two things: first,
that the ceremonial, typical, ritualistic worship of the Jewish
temple was designed to be temporary, and that the hour was swiftly
approaching when it would be entirely abolished; secondly, that even
that stated worship which had been devoid of a ceremonial, typical
and ritualistic character, would, under the influences to be exerted
upon the people of God in the dispensation about to be inaugurated,
become more spiritual than ever. These lessons the Lord Jesus
manifestly inculcated, and they justify the inferences: that as
instrumental music was a peculiar appendage of the temple it would
pass away with it; and that, as it was absent from the synagogue,
the Christian church, which was destined to be more spiritual in its
worship than was even that unceremonial and untypical institute,
could not consistently with its advanced nature and office introduce
it into its services. It would suppose in the church of the New
Testament a lower degree of spirituality in worship than was
possessed by that of the Old.

Furthermore, our Lord, in issuing to his apostles, just before his
ascension to glory, the great commission which contemplated the
evangelization of the world, imposed upon them this solemn
obligation: "Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you." This injunction of the Prophet and King of the
church involved three things: first, that the apostles, in their
oral communications and in their inspired writings, were to teach
all those things which Christ commanded; secondly, that they were to
teach nothing but what Christ commanded; and thirdly, that the
church to be organized by them was to obey their teaching,
originated and enforced by the authority of Christ, and to introduce
nothing into her doctrine, polity and worship which was not either
expressly or impliedly warranted by the command of Christ as
reflected by apostolic inculcation and example. This left the church
no discretion in regard to these elements of doctrine, government
and worship. She is absolutely bound by Christ’s commands, enounced
originally by the lips of the apostles, and now permanently recorded
in his inspired Word. She is obliged to do all that he has
commanded; she is forbidden to do anything which he has not
commanded. She can construct no new doctrine, institute no new
element of government, and decree no new rites and
ceremonies—introduce no new mode of worship. The inquiry, what
discretionary power the church possesses in the sphere of worship,
will be reserved to another part of this discussion. It is
sufficient now to say, that it is a discretionary power which she is
never entitled to use *as the church,*but simply as an organization
acting under secular and temporal conditions belonging to all human
societies. It is only where there is no need, perhaps no room, for a
command of Christ—in the sphere in which human wisdom, the natural
judgment of men, is competent to act, in which indeed it must act,
it is only here that the church is, from the very necessity of the
case, invested with discretionary power.

The question now being, Did Christ command the use of instrumental
music in his church? the answer must be, He did not. There is
certainly no such command on record. Nor can it be presumed. The
Lord Jesus knew the divine decree by which the temporary services of
the temple were destined to be abolished. He himself predicted the
utter destruction of the temple. He knew perfectly that instrumental
music was an attachment to the peculiar and distinctive services of
the temple, and therefore he knew that it must share the wreck to
which the temple with all those services was doomed. Did he
authorize his church to save instrumental music from the ruins, and
employ it in her worship? He did not. Is she then warranted to do
it? Assuredly not.

Our Lord, as a man, was perfectly familiar with the worship of the
synagogue. It is said that there were in his day at least four
hundred and fifty synagogues in the great city of Jerusalem itself,
churches in which the population worshipped from Sabbath to Sabbath,
just as a Christian people now worship in theirs. His custom was to
attend the synagogue wherever in his blessed itinerancy he chanced
to be. He full well knew the absence of instrumental music from its
services, and he knew that his church, when established as such,
would follow the precedents of stated Sabbath worship, which reached
immemorially back through the history of his ancient people. Did he
leave a command to his church to depart from that order, and
introduce instrumental music into its stated Sabbath worship? He did
not; and the defect of such a command is sufficient to settle the
question.

These considerations, did they need confirmation, would find it in
the actual practice of our Lord. We are informed that he sang psalms
with his disciples. On the fatal night in which he was betrayed, he
closed the affecting solemnity of instituting the sacrament of the
supper with singing. "And when they had sung an hymn," say two of
the evangelists in identically the same language, "they went out
into the Mount of Olives;" and the writer of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, in the wonderful chapter in which he argues the necessity
of the incarnation—the community of nature betwixt Christ and his
brethren, touchingly portrays him as discharging the office of their
preacher and of their precentor, saying, "I will declare thy name
unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto
thee." Nothing do we hear of instruments of music; but, as Justin
Martyr, or the pseudo-Justin, says of the psalmody of the early
church, only "simple singing." De Quincy [[7]](#[7]) has
contemptuously represented the singing of the English Dissenters "as
a howling wilderness of psalmody." He might have spared his
ridicule, had he reflected that one of the clerks who have led that
kind of singing was Jesus Christ himself. But "vain man would be
wise, though man be born like a wild ass’s colt." He has, with
magnificent rhetoric, described "the swell of the anthem, the burst
of the hallelujah chorus, the storm, the trampling movement of the
choral passion, . . . the tumult of the choir, the wrath of the
organ." Perchance he wrote better than he knew, when he represented
the organ as bringing forth wrath; and his prelatical scorn for
Christ’s humble and obedient people, as well as his splendid
rhetoric in glorifying the pomps of cathedral-service, may be
offsetted by the following passage from the coryphaeus of British
liberty: [[8]](#[8]) "In times of opposition, when either against
new heresies arising, or old corruptions to be reformed, this cool
unpassionate mildness of positive wisdom is not enough to damp and
astonish the proud resistance of carnal and false doctors, then
(that I may have leave to soar awhile as poets use) Zeal, whose
substance is ethereal, arming in complete diamond, ascends his fiery
chariot drawn with two blazing meteors, figured like beasts out of a
higher breed than any the zodiac yields, resembling two of those
four which Ezekiel and St. John saw; the one visaged like a lion, to
express power, high authority and indignation, the other of
countenance like a man, to cast derision and scorn upon perverse and
fraudulent seducers: with these the invincible warrior, Zeal,
shaking loosely the slack reins, drives over the heads of scarlet
prelates, and such as are insolent to maintain traditions, bruising
their stiff necks under his flaming wheels." Or, we may listen to
the rolling thunder of a mightier rhetoric than De Quincey or Milton
wielded—a thunder that, like the angry growl of a coming storm,
preludes the doom of that apostate mother from whose fertile womb
have crept the monstrous corruptions which have slimed the purity of
Christ’s fair and glorious bride: "Babylon the great is fallen, is
fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of
every foul spirit, ,and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird . .
. . Alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed in fine linen, and
purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and
pearls! . . . Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles
and prophets; for God hath avenged you on her . . . . And the voice
of harpers, and of musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters, shall
be heard no more in thee . . . . And after these things I heard a
great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia; salvation,
and glory, and honor, and power, unto the Lord our God: for true and
righteous are his judgments: for he hath judged the great whore,
which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged
the blood of his servants at her hand. And again they said,
Alleluia. And her smoke rose up forever and ever."

(2.) The teaching of the apostles excluded instrumental music from
thc public worship of the church.

Among the parts of that worship which are enumerated in the New
Testament the singing of praise is included, but not instrumental
music. The passages which are relevant are: 1 Cor. 14:26: "How is it
then, brethren? when ye come together, every one of you hath a
psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an
interpretation. Let all things be done unto edifying." Eph. 5:19:
"Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs,
singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord." Col. 3:16:
"Teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and
spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord."

"The cause of all the contention," says the Rev. A. Cromar,
[[9]](#[9]) "is in the fact, that the word *psalm* and the word
translated *making melody,*suggest at once to the mind the idea of
instrumental music. A psalm is with propriety defined, a sacred ode
designed to be sung to the accompaniment of the lyre, and the word
rendered *making melody*literally signifies, to strike the string of
the same instrument. Taking the words in their simplicity, the
passage, as far as music is concerned, seems to consist of two
parts—the one enjoining the *general*duty of praise in compositions
sung either with or without an instrumental accompaniment; and the
other *particularly*stating that praise, whether it be *with*or
*without*instrumental guidance, must always be of true gospel
character, that is, must be an exercise of the heart. If this, the
most *probable,*be also the *true,*sense of the passage (Eph. 5:19);
then we have in it what the friends of the organ believe to be the
divine mind in the matter."

The weight of scholarly authority is certainly against Mr. Cromar,
and those who, like him, would twist these passages to the support
of instrumental music in the public worship of the church. Dr. James
Begg, in noticing the exception taken by an anonymous writer to our
translation of the Bible, and his affirmation, with others, that
yallw radically signifies playing on a stringed musical instrument,
has these remarks which are worthy of attention: [[10]](#[10]) "This
attempt to fix the meaning of the word as implying playing instead
of singing, as used by the New Testament writers, was thoroughly set
aside by Dr. Porteous, by a variety of evidence, one part of which
is thus concluded: ‘From these quotations from the Greek fathers,
the three first of whom flourished in the fourth century—men of
great erudition, well skilled in the phraseology and language of
Scripture, perfectly masters of the Greek tongue, which was then
written and spoken with purity in the countries where they resided;
men, too, who for conscience sake would not handle the Word of God
deceitfully, it is evident that the Greek word yallw signified in
their time singing with the voice alone. Had they conceived
otherwise, we may be assured that they had both sufficient firmness
of mind and influence in the church to have induced their hearers to
have used the harp and psaltery in the public worship of God.’

"It is curious to observe how constantly, and with what pretence of
learning, mistakes are repeated. In a late discussion, the
correctness of our authorized translation of James 5:13 was
confidently called in question, and it was affirmed that yalletw
meant to strike as on the lyre, and that the passage ought not to
have been translated ‘let him sing psalms,’ but ‘let him play on an
instrument.’ The issue thus raised is a very broad and important
one, being neither more nor less than whether instrumental music is
divinely appointed in Christian worship. It indicates, at all
events, how far some hymnologists are prepared to go. If this idea
is correct, the Christian church in the early ages had entirely
mistaken the meaning of inspired men, and so has our church [the
Scottish] since the Reformation. We affirm, however, that yalletw in
James can mean nothing else than ‘let him sing psalms.’ The
substantive yalmoj occurs not oftener than *seven*times in the New
Testament; and its use there, apart from other evidence, would be
sufficient to determine the meaning of the verb yallw. The noun
occurs *three*times (Luke 20:42, 24:44; Acts 1:20), where it refers
to the book of Psalms; *once* (Acts 13:33), where it refers to the
second psalm; *twice* (Eph. 5:19; Col. 3:16), where with other two
words the rendering is ‘psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs’; and
*once*(1 Cor. 14:26), ‘When ye come together, every one of you hath
a psalm.’ In regard to the verb itself, besides the passage in James
and in Ephesians 5:19, just referred to, yallw only occurs
*three*times in the New Testament; *twice*(1 Cor. 14:15), where its
use absolutely excludes instrumental music, and must imply singing
inspired (?) songs or psalms—‘I will sing with the spirit, and I
will sing with the understanding also;’ and *once*(Rom. 15:9), ‘As
it is written, For this cause I will confess to thee among the
Gentiles, and sing unto thy name.’ It is interesting to notice that
the latter passage is exactly copied from the Septuagint (Ps.
18:49), and this affords a striking proof of the correctness of the
rendering for which we are now contending. As thus quoted by the
apostle, we have an inspired rendering into the Greek verb yallw of
a Hebrew word which is usually translated ‘sing praises’ or ‘sing
psalms.’ ‘Singing psalms’ was the only authorized vocal praise of
the church of old. The question now, as every one knows, is not
about the roots or the original meaning of words, but about the
sense in which they were used by the inspired writers; yallw never
occurs in the New Testament, in its radical signification, to strike
or play upon an instrument.

"The forty or fifty high scholars of England through whose hands the
authorized version of our Scriptures passed, were thoroughly
acquainted with these things, and seldom fail, in matters of the
least importance, to give, either in the text or in the margin, a
correct version of the original language—although, of course, they
were not infallible. In connection with this, it is not
uninteresting, however, to observe how fully the correctness of our
authorized version is confirmed by Luther and the early Reformers.
Luther translates yalletw (Jam. 5:13) ‘der singe psalmen;’
Wickliffe, ‘and seye he a salm;’ Tyndale, ‘let him singe psalmes;’
and Cranmer, ‘let him synge psalms.’ Dean Alford, too, among recent
critics, strong Episcopalian as he is, and interested in vindicating
instrumental music, renders the word ‘let him sing praise.’ Mr.
Young, in his translation of the Bible ‘according to the letter and
idioms of the original languages,’ renders the passage, ‘let him
sing psalms;’ and Dr. Giles, late Fellow of Christ Church College,
Oxford, in his New Testament, ‘translated word for word,’ London,
1861, also renders it, ‘let him sing psalms.’"

There is no need to multiply authorities. All commentators admit
that psalms primarily designated sacred odes which were suited to be
accompanied, when sung, by instruments of music. But the great
majority concur in holding that the secondary sense, of sacred
compositions to be sung, is that in which the word is used in the
New Testament. How could it be otherwise with men who had learning
enough to know, that instrumental music was excluded from the public
worship of the apostolic church? If it be urged that this is begging
the question, and proof be demanded, the appeal is taken, first, to
the preceding argument; and, secondly, to the practice of the
post-apostolic church. If the apostles had allowed the employment of
instrumental music in the church, it is morally certain, from the
very constitution of human nature, that it would have continued to
be used subsequently to their time. But it was not; and its absence
can be accounted for only on the ground that the New Testament
Church had never adopted it. If it had been in use under the
apostles, its ejection could only have been accomplished by a
revolutionary change which would have been a revolt from apostolic
practice. Such a supposition is on every account absurd—indeed is
impossible. The proof that the early church knew nothing of
instrumental music it is proposed to furnish in a subsequent part of
this discussion. Its presentation is, therefore, postponed.

Even if the foregoing argument from the New Testament Scriptures had
only a respectable degree of probability, it would seem to be
preposterous to attempt its refutation by a single ambiguous word—a
word conceded by those who take that position themselves to have
both an original and a secondary signification. As, further, it is
not pleaded that the words *"hymns* and *spiritual songs"*imply the
accompaniment of instruments, they who stand on the primary sense of
the word *psalms*would be obliged to admit that some of the singing
of the apostolic church was accompanied by instrumental music and
some was not. When they succeed in proving that such was the case,
they may with some plausibility claim the surrender of their
opponents. Is it not evident that the argument which rests on the
single word *psalms*swings on a rickety hinge?

​5. The only other argument from the New Testament Scriptures will
be derived from the condemnation which they pronounce upon
"will-worship." Will-worship is that which is not commanded by God,
but devised by man. We have seen that God commanded instrumental
music to be employed in connection with the temple. It was,
therefore, in that relation not an element of will-worship. It was
of course legitimate. But had the Jew employed it in the synagogue,
he would have been guilty of the sin of will-worship. Why? Because,
without the divine warrant he would have asserted his own will in
regard to the public worship of God. Now that the temple is gone,
all that was peculiar to it is gone with it. To revive any of its
defunct services, and borrow them from its ruins for the
ornamentation of the Christian church, is an instance of
will-worship. The general principle is enounced by Paul in the
Epistle to the Colossians, although he applies it specifically to a
certain class of cases. "Wherefore," says he, "if ye be dead with
Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as though living in the
world, are ye subject to ordinances, (Touch not; taste not; handle
not; which are all to perish with the using;) after the commandments
and doctrines of men? which things have indeed a shew of wisdom in
will-worship, and humility, and neglecting of the body; not in any
honor to the satisfying of the flesh." Instrumental music, as has
been proved, was one of the rudiments of that ceremonial and typical
ritual by which it pleased God to train the Israelites, as children
in a preparatory school, for the manhood of the Christian
dispensation with its glorious privileges and its expanded
responsibilities. This was the view of even Aquinas and Bellarmin.
He, therefore, who would import that effete element into the Church
of the New Dispensation would impugn the wisdom of God, assert his
will against the divine authority, and abandon the freedom of Christ
for the bondage of Moses.


[1] The answer to this is found in the obvious distinction between
moral and positive laws—the former being immutable, the latter not.
[[back]](#back1)

[2] This was afterwards expressly asserted to Paul by the apostles
at Jerusalem as the sense of the synod’s decision. "As touching the
Gentiles," said they, "which believe, we have written and concluded
that they observe no such thing." Acts 21:25. [[back]](#back2)

[3] The allusion here cannot be to the covenant of works as
historically preceding the covenant of grace. It is to that special
form in which God administered the covenant of grace in the Jewish
dispensation which gave way to another form of administration under
the Christian economy. [[back]](#back3)

[4] *Kingdom of Christ,*pp. 83-85. Am. Ed., pp. 84-86.
[[back]](#back4)

[5] *Comm. on Acts,*Chap. 6. [[back]](#back5)

[6]*Art. Stephen,*Smith’s Dict. of Bible. [[back]](#back6)

[7] *Writings,*Vol. i. p. 224; Boston: Ticknor, Reed and Fields,
1851. [[back]](#back7)

[8] Milton’s *Prose Works.*Vol. i., p. 135; Philadelphia: John W.
Moore. 1847. [[back]](#back8)

[9] *Vindication of the Organ,* pp. 93, 94. [[back]](#back9)

[10]*The Use of Organs, p.*264, *ff.* [[back]](#back10) \


# ARGUMENT FROM THE PRESBYTERIAN STANDARDS.

IN arguing against the use of instrumental music in public worship
from the Presbyterian standards—that is, the formularies of
doctrine, government and worship of the Presbyterian Church—I desire
it to be distinctly understood that they are not viewed or treated
as an authority independent of the inspired Word of God. All the
authority which they possess—every whit of it—is derived from that
Word. Apart from it they have none. In the first place, as human
compositions they may or may not exactly accord with the Scriptures
and faithfully represent their meaning. So far as they do, and only
so far as they do, they are clothed with the authority of the divine
Word itself, and as every Christian admits that the authority of
that Word is binding upon all men, they, to that extent, confessedly
exercise a controlling authority upon all men. In the second place,
the members, and especially the. officers of that church of which
they are a directory of faith and practice, are, over and beyond
this general obligation which rests upon all men, under a special
obligation resulting from their voluntary acceptance of these
standards as a true interpretation of the Scriptures, and from their
covenanted agreement with their brethren of the same faith and order
to be governed by them as the constitution of their church. It is,
therefore, with reference to them, not exclusively, but in a very
special sense, that, in the construction and development of this
particular argument, the appeal is made to the Presbyterian
standards. I speak as unto wise men; let them judge what may be said
in relation to this venerable tribunal.

Let it be also noticed that, in pursuing this particular line of
argument, it is by no means claimed that new material proofs are
derived from these formularies. The proofs have already been
presented from the Scriptures, both of the Old Testament and of the
New, and the conclusion which they justify has already been reached
and enounced. The present appeal is to the standards as clearly
summing up the scriptural proofs and definitely enforcing the
conclusion, and as having a peculiar authority for those who, in the
conflict of religious opinions, have adopted them as, in their
judgment, a correct statement and exposition of the law of the Lord.
But in addition to this, let it be remarked, these standards clearly
define the limitations upon such discretionary power in the sphere
of worship, and in every other sphere, as is to be conceded to the
church. They define it both negatively—declaring what it is not; and
positively—declaring what it is; and it is in this especial regard
that the reference to their authority is invested with interest and
importance.

​1. Instrumental music is, by good and necessary consequence,
excluded from the public worship of the church by the exposition
which the Catechisms furnish of the Second Commandment. In the
citation of their words, only such will be adduced as bear upon the
subject of worship and are relevant to the question in hand.

"What," asks the Larger Catechism, [[1]](#[1]) "are the duties
required in the second commandment?" "The duties required in the
second commandment are the receiving, observing, and keeping pure
and entire all such religious worship and ordinances as God hath
instituted in his Word . . . . Also, the disapproving, detesting,
opposing all false worship, and, according to each one’s place and
calling, removing it."

"What are the sins forbidden in the second commandment?" "The sins
forbidden in the second commandment are: All devising, counseling,
commanding, using, and any wise approving any religious worship not
instituted by God himself; . . . all superstitious devices,
corrupting the worship of God, adding to it or taking from it,
whether invented and taken up of ourselves or received by tradition
from others, though under the title of antiquity, custom, devotion,
good intent, or any other pretence whatsoever; . . . all neglect,
contempt, hindering, and opposing the worship and ordinances which
God hath appointed."

"What are the reasons annexed to the second commandment, the more to
enforce it? "The reasons annexed to the second commandment, the more
to enforce it, contained in these words, For I the Lord thy God am a
jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me: and
showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my
commandments; are, besides God’s sovereignty over us and propriety
in us, his fervent zeal for his own worship, and his revengeful
indignation against all false worship, as being a spiritual
whoredom; accounting the breakers of his commandment such as hate
him, and threatening to punish them unto divers generations, and
esteeming the observers of it such as love him and keep his
commandments, and promising mercy to them unto many generations."

The Shorter Catechism [[2]](#[2]) thus condenses these statements of
the Larger: "The second commandment requireth the receiving,
observing and keeping pure and entire all such religious worship and
ordinances as God hath appointed in his Word." It "forbiddeth the
worshipping of God by images, or any other way not appointed in his
Word." "The reasons annexed. . . . are, God’s sovereignty over us,
his propriety in us, and the zeal he hath to his own worship."

Let us attentively consider the features of this commandment which
are signalized by these formularies:

(1.) The zeal and jealousy, fervent and lasting, which God manifests
touching everything that concerns his worship. This is suited to
arrest our notice, and to alarm and restrain those who assert their
right to decree rites and ceremonies, and to regulate divine worship
according to their own judgment and taste as to what is fitting and
decorous in the services of the Lord’s house. He himself stands
guard over his own sanctuary, and, armed with bolts of vengeance,
threatens with condign punishment the invaders of his prerogative,
the usurpers of his rights. We have seen how awfully this lesson was
enforced under the old dispensation, how swiftly, like lightning,
his judgments flashed against rash and insolent assertors of their
own will in regard to the mode in which he was to be worshipped, and
how severely he dealt with his own choicest and holiest servants for
departures from his prescriptions in this matter. This vehement zeal
and jealousy of God for the purity of his worship should deter us
from venturing one step beyond the directions of his Word. Who, for
the sake of the ornaments of art and the suggestions of fancy, would
unnecessarily challenge the visitations of his wrath? In this
dispensation he is patient and forbearing, but who will coolly elect
to go, with the unexpunged guilt of encroaching upon the sovereignty
of God over the worship of his house, to the tremendous bar of last
accounts?

(2.) The great principle is here brought out and emphasized, that
not only is what God has positively commanded to be obeyed, but what
he has not commanded is forbidden. The law is, not that we are at
liberty to act when God has not spoken, but just the contrary: we
have no right to act when he is silent. It will not answer to say in
justification of some element of worship that God has not expressly
prohibited it; we must produce a divine warrant for it. The absence
of such a warrant is an interdiction. The exposition of the second
commandment enforces the obligation, not only to receive, observe
and keep pure and entire all such religious worship and ordinances
as God *hath instituted*in his Word, but also not to devise,
counsel, command, use and any wise approve any religious worship
*not instituted* by God himself. The instance, already commented on,
of Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, God’s venerable high priest,
is exactly in point. They were visited with summary judgment, as we
are explicitly told, for performing a function in worship which God
had not commanded. We cannot without guilt transcend divine
appointments. No discretion is allowed the church to introduce into
public worship what God himself has not instituted and appointed. He
has not constituted her his vicegerent or his confidential agent.
She is intrusted with no powers plenipotentiary. She acts under
instructions, and is required to adhere to the text of her
commission.

The application to instrumental music in the public worship of the
church is plain. It was permissible, as has been shown, only when
God commanded it, and he commanded it in connection with the typical
and temporary services of the temple. He did not command it to be
used in the ordinary Sabbath worship of the synagogue, and
accordingly it was not employed in that institute. The Jew obeyed
the divine will in that respect. God did not command it to be
introduced into the Christian church, and in conformity with his
will it was not employed in the apostolic or the early church. It
was not known in the church for centuries. It was, as will be shown,
a late importation into its services—an importation effected without
divine authorization, and therefore in the face of the divine will.
If our exposition of the second commandment is valid—and we
acknowledge it to be both valid and authoritative—we violate that
commandment when we employ instrumental music in public worship,
because we devise, counsel, command, use and approve a mode of
"religious worship not instituted by God himself." That God did not
institute it, either in connection with the Jewish synagogue or with
the Christian church, has been irrefragably proved.

These things being so, we cannot, in accordance with the
requirements of this commandment, acquiesce in the employment of
instrumental music in the public worship of the church. No "title of
antiquity, custom, devotion, good intent, or any other pretence
whatsoever,"' will justify or excuse us. It will not avail us to
plead that we found it in use, and are not called upon to urge or
enact revolutionary measures. We are bound to disapprove, detest,
oppose all false worship, and as this is in that category, to
disapprove, detest and oppose it. The argument to prove its want of
divine warrant must be overthrown before the position of inaction
and acquiescence can be conscientiously maintained. Nor will it do
to say that we have not examined the question—that we do not know.
We ought to examine, we ought to know, for as Presbyterians our
standards plainly expound to us the divine law on the subject, and
as Christians we have no right to be ignorant of the teaching of
Scripture in regard to it. "To the law and to the testimony; if they
speak not according to them, it is because there is no light in
them."

The principle, thus strongly emphasized by the exposition of the
second commandment, that a divine warrant is required for everything
entering into the worship of God, is also enounced and enforced in
the following utterances of the Confession of Faith: "God alone is
Lord of the conscience, and hath left it free from the doctrines and
commandments of men which are in any thing contrary to his Word, *or
beside it*in matters of faith and worship." [[3]](#[3]) "The
acceptable way of worshipping the true God is instituted by himself,
and so limited by his own revealed will, that he may not be
worshipped according to the imaginations and devices of men, or the
suggestions of Satan, under any visible representation, *or any
other way not prescribed in the Holy Scripture."* [[4]](#[4])In
these words the Confession declares, that the conscience is left
free to reject the teaching of any doctrines and the authority of
any commandments which are beside the Word of God in the matter of
worship; and that it is not permissible to worship him in any way
not prescribed in the Scriptures. If, as has been evinced,
instrumental music in public worship was in the Old Testament only
prescribed as an appendage of the temple, and was not prescribed in
connection with the synagogue, and is not prescribed in the New
Testament, it is obviously beside the Word of God, destitute of his
authority, and therefore to be rejected.

​2. Instrumental music is excluded from the public worship of God’s
house by the declarations of the Confession of Faith and the
Directory for Worship concerning singing.

The Confession of Faith, in enumerating the "parts of the ordinary
religious worship of God," specifics "singing of psalms with grace
in the heart." The Directory for Worship thus speaks: "It is the
duty of Christians to praise God by singing psalms." "The proportion
of the time of public worship to be spent in singing is left to the
prudence of every minister."

(1.) These provisions of the Confession of Faith and the Directory
for Worship exclude instrumental music from the public worship of
the church which acknowledges them as its formularies, in accordance
with the legal maxim, *Expressio unius est exclusio alterius:*the
express statement of one alternative is the exclusion of the other.
If two men were supposed, upon probable grounds, to be chargeable
with the same offence, the indictment of only one of them would be
the exclusion of the other from the indictment. No formal naming of
the person not included in the indictment is necessary. If of two
acts, which might be performed under given circumstances, one only
is commanded in a statute to be done, the other is excluded—it is
not commanded. And so, if of two acts which might be done under
given circumstances, one only is by statute permitted, the other is
excluded from the permission—it is forbidden. To apply the principle
to the case in hand: the singing of psalms or hymns and the
performance of instrumental music are two distinct acts which may be
done at one and the same time. The ecclesiastical law commands only
one of these acts to be done in public worship. It follows that the
other is excluded—it is not commanded. But does this, it may be
asked, rule out the other? May it not be done, although not
commanded? The answer is to be found in the great principle, already
established by scriptural proofs, that what Christ has not commanded
to be observed, men have no right to introduce into the worship of
his church; and those who acknowledge the ecclesiastical law which
is now appealed to, as correctly representing or rather reproducing
thc divine law, are bound to hold that what the ecclesiastical law
does not authorize cannot be legitimately introduced into the
worship of the church. We have seen that it is not true that what is
not forbidden is permitted, but on the contrary, what is not
commanded is forbidden. It follows that, as the law in the
Presbyterian standards does authorize singing and does not authorize
instrumental music, the latter is excluded. It is extra-legal, and
therefore contra-legal.

(2.) This interpretation of the law in the standards is confirmed by
what we know of the mind and intention of its framers in regard to
this matter. Before the Westminster Assembly of Divines undertook
the office of preparing a Directory for Worship, the Parliament had
authoritatively adopted measures looking to the removal of organs,
along with other remains of Popery, from the churches of England. On
the 20^th^ of May, 1644, the commissioners from Scotland wrote to
the General Assembly of their church and made the following
statement among others: "We cannot but admire the good hand of God
in the great things done here already, particularly that the
covenant, the foundation of the whole work, is taken, Prelacy and
the whole train thereof extirpated, the service-book in many places
forsaken, plain and powerful preaching set up, many colleges in
Cambridge provided with such ministers as are most zealous of the
best reformation, altars removed, the communion in some places given
at the table with sitting, the great organs at Paul’s and Peter’s in
Westminster taken down, images and many other monuments of idolatry
defaced and abolished, the Chapel Royal at Whitehall purged and
reformed; and all by authority, in a quiet manner, at noon-day,
without tumult." [[5]](#[5]) So thorough was the work of removing
organs that the "Encyclopaedia Britannica" says that "at the
Revolution most of the organs in England had been destroyed."
[[6]](#[6])

When, therefore, the Assembly addressed itself to the task of
framing a Directory for Worship, it found itself confronted by a
condition of the churches of Great Britain in which the singing of
psalms without instrumental accompaniment almost universally
prevailed. In prescribing, consequently, the singing of psalms
without making any allusion to the restoration of instrumental
music, it must, in all fairness, be construed to specify the simple
singing of praise as a part of public worship. The question,
moreover, is settled by the consideration that had any debate
occurred as to the propriety of allowing the use of instrumental
music, the Scottish commissioners would have vehemently and
uncompromisingly opposed that measure. But Lightfoot, who was a
member of the Assembly, in his "Journal of its Proceedings"
[[7]](#[7]) tells us: "This morning we fell upon the Directory for
singing of psalms; and, in a short time, we finished it." He says
that the only point upon which the Scottish commissioners had some
discussion was the reading of the Psalms line by line.

If anything were lacking to confirm these views, it would be found
in what is known of the state of opinion in the Puritan party, the
party represented in the Westminster Assembly, as well before as
during the sessions of that body.

"Her Majesty [Elizabeth] was afraid," says Neal, "of reforming too
far; she was desirous to retain images in churches, crucifixes and
crosses, vocal and instrumental music, with all the old popish
garments; it is not, therefore, to be wondered that, in reviewing
the liturgy of King Edward, no alterations were made in favor of
those who now began to be called Puritans, from their attempting a
purer form of worship and discipline than had as yet been
established." [[8]](#[8])

"Drs. Humphreys and Samson," says the same historian, "two heads of
the Non-conformists, wrote to Zurich the following reasons against
wearing the habits." After giving the reasons the writers continue:
"But the dispute is not only about a cap and surplice; there are
other grievances which ought to be redressed or dispensed with; as
(1) music and organs in divine worship," etc. [[9]](#[9])

He further says: "They [the Puritans] disallowed of the cathedral
mode of worship; of singing their prayers, and of the antiphone or
chanting of the Psalms by turns, which the ecclesiastical
commissioners in King Edward the Sixth’s time advised the laying
aside. Nor did they approve of musical instruments, as trumpets,
organs, etc., which were not in use in the church for above 1200
years after Christ." [[10]](#[10])

John Owen, the great Puritan divine, who was contemporary with the
Westminster Assembly, says: [[11]](#[11]) "Not only hereby the
praising and blessing of God, but the use of those forms in so doing
became a necessary part of the worship of God; and so was the use of
organs and the like instruments of music, which respect that manner
of praising him which God then required." He speaks here of the
temple-service in the Jewish dispensation. This venerable servant of
Christ also says: [[12]](#[12]) "And he [David] speaks expressly, in
1 Chron. 23:5, of praising God with instruments of music ‘which,’
says he, ‘I made.’ He did it by the direction of the Spirit of God;
otherwise he ought not to have done it; for so it is said, 1 Ch.
28:12, when he had established all the ordinances of the temple,
‘the pattern of all that he had by the Spirit.’ And verse 19, ‘All
this,’ said David, ‘the Lord made me understand in writing by his
hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern.’ It was all
revealed unto him by the Holy Spirit, without which he could have
introduced nothing at all into the worship of God."

From what has been said, it is evident that the provisions in the
Confession of Faith and the Directory for Worship touching singing
in public worship were intended to exclude the employment of
instrumental music; and it follows that its use by those who accept
these formularies is in violation of their constitutional law.

​3. Instrumental music is doctrinally excluded from the public
worship of the church by the Confession of Faith.

The passage which is appealed to in support of this position is as
follows: "The whole counsel of God concerning all things necessary
for his own glory, man’s salvation, faith, and life, is either
expressly set down in Scripture, or by good and necessary
consequence may be deduced from Scripture: unto which nothing is at
any time to be added, whether by new revelations of the Spirit or
traditions of men. Nevertheless, we acknowledge the inward
illumination of the Spirit of God to be necessary for the saving
understanding of such things as are revealed in the Word; and that
*there are some circumstances concerning the worship of God and
government of the church common to human actions and societies which
are to be ordered by the light of nature and Christian prudence,
according to the general rules of the Word, which are always to be
observed."*[[13]](#[13])

(1.) The whole preceding argument clearly proves that the
Westminster Assembly could not have intended to include instrumental
music in those circumstances concerning—not in, nor of, not
implicated in the nature of, but concerning—the worship of God, the
ordering of which it concedes not to be prescribed by Scripture, but
to depend upon natural judgment and Christian discretion. Let us
glance back at that argument. It proved: that the prescriptive will
of God regulates all things pertaining to the kind of worship to be
rendered him in his house; that nothing which is not commanded by
him in his Word, either explicitly or implicitly, can be warrantably
introduced into the public worship of his sanctuary; that man’s
will, wisdom, or taste can, in this sphere, originate nothing,
authorize nothing, but that human discretion is excluded, and
absolute obedience to the divine authority imposed; that
instrumental music was not commanded of God to be used in connection
with the tabernacle during the greater part of its existence, and
consequently it was not there employed; that God expressly commanded
it to be used in the temple, and therefore it was employed in its
services; that the temple itself, with all that was peculiar and
distinctive in its worship, was typical and symbolical, and was
designed to be temporary; that it did pass away at the beginning of
the Christian dispensation; that instrumental music was a part of
its typical elements, and has consequently shared its abolition;
that instrumental music was not commanded of God to be used in
connection with the synagogue, which existed contemporaneously with
the temple, and was therefore not employed in its services; that the
Christian church was, in its polity and worship, conformed not to
the temple, but to the synagogue, as is admitted even by some
distinguished Prelatists, such modifications and conditions having
been added as necessarily grew out of the change of
dispensations—the accomplishment of atonement, the copious effusion
of the Holy Ghost, and the evangelistic genius and office of the new
economy; that instrumental music in public worship was not one of
these Christian modifications or conditions; that the New Testament
Scriptures exclude that kind of music, and that it was unknown in
the practice of the apostolic church, as is evinced not only by the
teaching of the apostles, but also by the absence of instrumental
music from the church for more than a millennium.

Now, this was the way in which the Westminster divines, together
with the whole Puritan party, were accustomed to argue, and in
addition to this method of argument from Scripture, they also
condemned instrumental music as one of those badges of Popery from
which they contended that the church should be purged. To take the
ground, then, that in the single clause in regard to "the
circumstances concerning the worship of God . . . common to human
actions and societies, which are to be ordered by the light of
nature and Christian prudence," they meant to include instrumental
music, is to maintain that in that one utterance they contradicted
and subverted their whole doctrine on the subject. It would be to
say that they made all their solemn contentions and cherished views
upon that subject what the wise woman of Tekoah represented human
life to be, "as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered
up again." The thing is preposterous. It cannot for a moment be
supposed. One might, therefore, close the argument just here.
Whatever the Assembly meant to include in the category of
circumstances falling under the discretion of the church, it is
absolutely certain that it was not intended to embrace in it
instrumental music. But inasmuch as, notwithstanding this obtrusive
fact, the clause in the Confession of Faith touching circumstances
concerning the worship of God is unaccountably but commonly pleaded
in justification of the employment of instrumental music in church
services, I will endeavor to vindicate it from that abusive
construction.

(2.) Let us determine, in the light of the instrument that we are
interpreting, *what these circumstances are.*

They are expressly defined to be such as are "common to human
actions and societies." It would seem needless to discuss the
question. One feels that he is talking superfluously and triflingly
in arguing that circumstances common to human actions are not and
cannot be peculiar to church actions. It is certain that
circumstances common to human societies cannot be peculiar to church
societies. But these circumstances are declared to be common to
human societies, to societies of all sorts—political, philosophical,
scientific, literary, mercantile, agricultural, mechanical,
industrial, military, and even infidel. Time and place, costume and
posture, sitting or standing, and the like, are circumstances common
to all societies, and therefore pertain to the church as a society.
But will it be seriously maintained that instrumental music is such
a circumstance? Is it common to human societies? These questions
answer themselves. As instrumental music is not a circumstance
common to all societies, it is not one of the circumstances
specified in the Confession of Faith. It is excluded by the terms
which it uses.

It may be said that, as all human societies have the right to order
the circumstances in which their peculiar acts shall be performed,
the church possesses this common right, and may appoint the
circumstance of instrumental music as an accompaniment to its
peculiar act of singing praise. How this relieves the difficulty it
is impossible to see. For the Confession defines the circumstances
in question to be common to human actions, and therefore common to
the actions of all human societies. But it will not be contended
that the action of singing praise in the worship of God belongs to
all societies as such. If that action does not belong to them, no
circumstances attending it can belong to them. The community of the
action infers the community of the circumstances attending it. The
ground of the objection is therefore swept away; there is no such
action common to all societies as the singing of praise in God’s
worship, and consequently no such circumstance attending it as
instrumental music. The action and the circumstance vanish together.
If the action of singing praise belonged alike to the church and all
societies there might be some color of plausibility in the plea that
the church may determine the circumstances which attend it as done
by herself, so far, at least, as the terms of this particular clause
in the Confession of Faith are concerned. If, however, the action of
singing praise in God’s worship is peculiar to the church as a
particular kind of society, the circumstance of instrumental music
as attending it cannot be common to human actions and societies. It
is therefore ruled out by the language of the Confession.

This argument is conclusive, unless it can be shown that
instrumental music is a circumstance necessary to the performance of
the action—singing of praise. A simple and complete answer to this
is, that for a thousand years the church sang praise without
instrumental accompaniment. How then can its necessity to the
singing of praise be maintained? Can a circumstance be necessary to
the performance of an act, when the act *has been*performed without
it, and *is now*continually, Sabbath after Sabbath, performed
without it? To say that instrumental music assists in the
performance of the act is to shift the issue. The question is not,
Is it helpful? but, Is it necessary?

To this it must be added that this particular provision of the
Confession is to be interpreted in conformity with its catholic
teaching and that of its sister standards. Both represent the
singing of psalms as prescribed. Both are silent about the
prescription of instrumental music. Now if it could be proved that
the latter is necessary to the former, the prescription of one would
logically imply the prescription of the other. But we have seen that
there is no such necessity. We are obliged therefore to exclude
instrumental music as illegitimate, in view of the express
declaration of the Confession and other standards that we are
forbidden to introduce anything into the worship of God which is not
prescribed. Here is a circumstance which is neither necessary nor
prescribed. It cannot, therefore, be among the circumstances
legitimated by the Confession.

We have now seen that the action of singing praise in the worship of
God is one peculiar to the church and not common to it with all
other societies, and that instrumental music is a circumstance
concerning this peculiar ecclesiastical action which, therefore,
cannot be common to human actions and societies. Consequently, it is
not one of those circumstances which are in the discretionary power
of the church, precisely as they are in the discretionary power of
all societies. No circumstance peculiar to and distinctive of the
church, as such, can be one of the circumstances mentioned by the
Confession of Faith.

The question then returns: What are the circumstances concerning the
worship of God which the church has the right to order according to
the light of nature and Christian prudence? Their proper definition
is, that *they are*CONDITIONS *upon which the actions of all human
societies are performed,—conditions without which the actions of any
society either cannot be performed at all, or cannot be performed
decently and in order.*

*First,*They are conditions which are not peculiar to the acts of
any particular society, but common to the acts of all societies.
They cannot, consequently, be peculiar to the acts of the church as
a particular society. But instrumental music is a condition peculiar
to the act of singing praise in some particular churches. The
conclusion is obvious. Let us take, for example, the circumstances
of time and place. They condition the meeting and therefore the acts
of every society. None could meet and act without the appointment of
a time and a place for the assembly. This is true alike of the
church and an infidel club. In this respect they are dependent upon
the same conditions. Neither could meet and act without complying
with this condition. This is a specimen of the Confession’s
circumstances which are common to human actions and societies. It is
ridiculous to say that instrumental music is in such a category.

It cannot be overlooked, as has just been intimated, that
instrumental music is a circumstance which is not common to even
particular churches. Some have it, and some do not. How can it be
common to all societies, when it is not common to churches
themselves? How can the conclusion be avoided, that it is not one of
the circumstances designated by the Confession of Faith?

*Secondly,*The circumstances indicated by the Confession are not
parts of the acts of societies: they simply condition the
performance of the acts. They are in no sense qualities or modes of
the acts. If the proof of this position is required, it is found in
the simple consideration that some at least of the acts of various
societies are different acts—they are not common between them. It is
therefore obvious that the parts of those acts fall into the
category of the acts of which they are parts. But these
circumstances are common to the acts of all societies. To recur to
the example of time and place. These, it is needless to say, while
necessary conditions of the acts of all societies, are, from the
nature of the case, parts of the acts of none, The resolutions
adopted by any society surely do not embrace in them time and place
as integral elements, or qualities or modes. But instrumental music,
although sometimes employed in churches by itself as a distinct
act—in which case it stands confessed as not prescribed and
forbidden—is generally used along with singing as a part of the act
of church-worship. In these cases it certainly qualifies or modifies
the act. As, therefore, it enters as an element into the acts of the
church, as a distinctive society, and does not into the acts of all
societies, it is ruled out by that fact from the class of
circumstances indicated by the Confession.

*Thirdly,*These circumstances are conditions of actions as they are
actions, and not as they are these or those particular kinds of
actions. They condition all sorts of actions of all sorts of
societies. The debates and votes of a secular deliberative body are
as much conditioned by them as the prayers and praises of the
church. It will scarcely be contended that instrumental music is a
circumstance which conditions the debates and votes of a legislature
or of a political meeting. But if not, it is conceded to be excluded
from those circumstances which are pronounced by the Confession
common to human actions and societies.

*Fourthly,*These circumstances are conditions *necessary* to the
actions of all societies,—necessary either to the performance of the
actions, or to their decorous performance. Let it be observed, that
they are necessary not to the performance or the decorous
performance of some peculiar actions of particular societies, but to
all the actions of all societies. To take the ground that
instrumental music is a circumstance in some way a necessary
condition of the singing of praise in church-worship is to go
outside of those circumstances which the Confession of Faith
contemplates. A condition of this peculiar action of the church,
however necessary to the performance of the action its employers may
deem it, cannot possibly be a common condition of human actions and
societies. It lies outside of that class, and therefore outside of
the circumstances which the Confession has in view. Instrumental
music is palpably such a condition, and cannot be justified by an
appeal to this section of the Confession.

*Fifthly,*These circumstances, as conditions upon which the acts of
societies are to be done, cannot be *religious*in their character.
The reason is perfectly plain: they condition the acts of all
secular societies, and it would be out of the question to say that
they proceed upon religious conditions. But instrumental music when
employed in the worship of God’s house is religious. Hence the plea
for organs, that they have a solemn sound, and are on that account
peculiarly adapted to accompany the singing of praise as a religious
act. If it be said that they are a secular accompaniment of
religious worship, it may well be asked, By what right is such an
accompaniment to the worship of God employed, without a distinct
warrant from him? And when the organ is played without the
accompaniment of the singing of praise, is it then secular or
religious? If secular, will it be justified on the ground that
secular music may, by itself, be allowed in God’s house, and that he
may be worshipped in a worldly manner? If religious, the question is
given up; and then we are compelled to return to the assertion that
the church has no discretion in appointing religious elements: they
are not among the circumstances which are common to human actions
and societies.

The foregoing argument has shown that instrumental music cannot, on
any supposable ground, be regarded as a circumstance common to human
actions and societies, and that it is therefore excluded by the
Confession of Faith from the discretionary control of the church.
Unless, then, it can be proved to be one of the things commanded by
Christ and his apostles, it cannot be lawfully employed in
connection with the worship of God’s house. In order to meet the
criticism which may be passed upon the argument that it springs from
a singular and contracted conception of the doctrine as to
circumstances stated in the Confession of Faith, the views of a few
eminent theologians will be cited in its support.

Dr. John Owen, in arguing against a liturgy, enounces the principles
contended for in these remarks. "Circumstances," he says,
[[14]](#[14]) "are either such as follow actions as actions, or such
as are arbitrarily superadded and adjoined by command unto actions,
which do not of their own accord, nor naturally nor necessarily
attend them. Now religious actions in the worship of God are actions
still. Their religious relation doth not destroy their natural
being. Those circumstances, then, which do attend such actions as
actions not determined by divine institution, may be ordered,
disposed of, and regulated by the prudence of men. For instance,
prayer is a part of God’s worship. Public prayer is so, as appointed
by him. This, as it is an action to be performed by man, cannot be
done without the assignment of time, and place, and sundry other
things, if order and conveniency be attended to. These are
circumstances that attend all actions of that nature, to be
performed by a community, whether they relate to the worship of God
or no. These men may, according as they see good, regulate and
change as there is occasion; I mean, they may do so who are
acknowledged to have power in such things. As the action cannot be
without them, so their regulation is arbitrary, if they come not
under some divine disposition and order, as that of time in general
doth. There are also some things, which some men call circumstances
also, that no way belong of themselves to the actions whereof they
are said to be the circumstances, nor do attend them, but are
imposed on them, or annexed unto them, by the arbitrary authority of
those who take upon them to give order and rules in such cases; such
as to pray before an image or towards the east, or to use this or
that form of prayer in such gospel administrations, and no other.
These are not circumstances attending the nature of the thing
itself, but are arbitrarily superadded to the things that they are
appointed to accompany. Whatever men may call such additions, they
are no less parts of the whole wherein they serve than the things
themselves whereunto they are adjoined." He then goes on to prove
from Scripture that "such additions to or in the worship of God,
besides or beyond his own institution and appointment" are not
"allowable, or lawful to be practised."

In another place the same great theologian says: [[15]](#[15])
"Whatever is of circumstance in the manner of its performance
[worship], not capable of especial determination, as emerging or
arising only *occasionally,*upon the doing of that which is
appointed at this or that time, in this or that place, and the like,
is left unto the rule of *moral prudence,*in whose observation their
order doth consist. But the superaddition of ceremonies necessarily
belonging neither to the institutions of worship nor unto those
circumstances whose disposal falls under the rule of moral prudence,
neither doth nor can add any thing unto the due order of gospel
worship; so that they are altogether needless and useless in the
worship of God. Neither is this the whole of the inconvenience
wherewith their observance is attended; for although they are not in
particular and expressly in the Scripture forbidden—for it was
simply impossible that all instances wherein the wit of man might
exercise its invention in such things should be reckoned up and
condemned—yet they fall directly under those severe prohibitions
which God hath recorded to secure his worship from all such
additions unto it of what sort soever . . . . The Papists say,
indeed, that all *additions corrupting*the worship of God are
forbidden, but such as further adorn and preserve it are not so,
which implies a contradiction, for whereas every *addition*is
principally a *corruption,*because it is an addition, under which
notion it is forbidden (and that in the worship of God which is
forbidden is a corruption of it), there can be no such preserving,
adorning addition, unless we allow a preserving and adorning
corruption. Neither is it of more force, which is pleaded by them,
that the additions which they make belong not unto the *substance*of
the worship of God, but unto the *circumstances*of it; for every
circumstance observed religiously, or to be observed in the worship
of God, is of the substance of it, as were all those ceremonious
observances of the law, which had the same respect in the
prohibitions of adding, with the most weighty things whatsoever."

"There is nothing," says George Gillespie, [[16]](#[16]) "which any
way pertaineth to the worship of God left to the determination of
human laws beside the mere circumstances, which neither have any
holiness in them, forasmuch as they have no other use and praise in
sacred than they have in civil things, nor yet were particularly
determinable in Scripture, because they are infinite; but sacred,
significant ceremonies, such as [the] cross, kneeling, surplice,
holidays, bishopping, etc., which have no use and praise except in
religion only, and which, also, were most easily determinable (yet
not determined) within those bounds which the wisdom of God did set
to his written Word, are such things as God never left to the
determination of any human law."

He speaks more explicitly to the same effect in the following words:
[[17]](#[17]) "I direct my course straight to the dissecting of the
true limits within which the church’s power of enacting laws about
things pertaining to the worship of God is bounded and confined, and
which it may not overleap nor transgress. Three conditions I find
necessarily requisite in such a thing as the church has power to
prescribe by her laws:

"1. It must be only a circumstance of divine worship; no substantial
part of it; no sacred, significant, and efficacious ceremony. For
the order and decency left to the definition of the church, as
concerning the particulars of it, comprehendeth no more but mere
circumstances . . . . Though circumstances be left to the
determination of the church, yet ceremonies, if we speak properly,
are not . . . circumstances which have place in all moral actions,
and that to the same end and purpose for which they serve in
religious actions—namely, for beautifying them with that decent
demeanor which the very light and law of natural reason requireth as
a thing beseeming all human actions. For the church of Christ, being
a society of men and women, must either observe order and decency in
all the circumstances of their holy actions, time, place, person,
form, etc., or else be deformed with that disorder and confusion
which common reason and civility abhorreth.

"2. That which the church may lawfully prescribe by her laws and
ordinances, as a thing left to her determination, must be one of
such things as were not determinable by Scripture on that reason
which Camero hath given us, namely, because *individua*are
*infinita.*. . . We say truly of those several and changeable
circumstances which are left to the determination of the church,
that, being almost infinite, they were not particularly determinable
in Scripture . . . . . But as for other things pertaining to God’s
worship, which are not to be reckoned among the circumstances of it,
they being in number neither many nor in change various, were most
easily and conveniently determinable in Scripture. Now, since God
would have his Word (which is our rule in the works of his service)
not to be delivered by tradition, but to be written and sealed unto
us, that by this means, for obviating satanical subtility and
succoring human imbecility, we might have a more certain way for
conservation of true religion, and for the instauration of it when
it faileth among men,—how can we but assure ourselves that every
such acceptable thing pertaining any way to religion, which was
particularly and conveniently determinable in Scripture, is indeed
determined in it; and consequently, that no such thing as is not a
mere alterable circumstance is left to the determination of the
church?

"3. If the church prescribe anything lawfully, so that she prescribe
no more than she hath power given her to prescribe, her ordinance
must be accompanied with some good reason and warrant given for the
satisfaction of tender consciences."

"As a positive institution, with a written charter," remarks Dr.
Thornwell, [[18]](#[18]) "she [the church] is confined to the
express or implied teachings of the Word of God, the standard of her
authority and rights, . . . as in the sphere of doctrine she has no
opinions, but a faith, so, in the sphere of practice, she has no
expedients, but a law. Her power is solely ministerial and
declarative. Her whole duty is to believe and obey. Whatever is not
commanded, expressly or implicitly, is unlawful. . . . According to
our view, the law of the church is the positive one of conformity
with Scripture; according to the view which we condemned, it is the
negative one of non-contradiction to Scripture. According to us, the
church, before she can move, must not only show that she is not
prohibited, she must also show that she is actually commanded, she
must produce a warrant. Hence we absolutely denied that she has any
discretion in relation to things not commanded. She can proclaim no
laws that Christ has not ordained, institute no ceremonies which he
has not appointed, create no offices which he has not prescribed,
and exact no obedience which he has not enjoined. She does not enter
the wide domain which he has left indifferent, and by her authority
bind the conscience where he has left it free.

"But does it follow from this that she has absolutely no discretion
at all? On the contrary, we distinctly and repeatedly asserted, that
in the sphere of commanded things she *has*a discretion—a discretion
determined by the nature of the actions, and by the divine principle
that all things be done decently and in order. . . . We only limited
and defined it. We never denied that the church has the right to fix
the hours of public worship, the times and places of the meetings of
her courts, the numbers of which they shall be composed, and the
territories which each shall embrace. Our doctrine was precisely
that of the Westminster standards, of John Calvin, of John Owen, of
the Free Church of Scotland, and of the noble army of Puritan
martyrs and confessors."

After quoting the statements of the Westminster Confession of Faith
on the subject, he goes on to say: "Here the discretion is limited
to *some circumstances,*and those *common to human actions and
societies.*Now, the question arises, What is the nature of these
circumstances? A glance at the proof-texts on which the doctrine
relies enables us to answer. Circumstances are those concomitants of
an action without which it either cannot be done at all, or cannot
be done with decency and decorum. Public worship, for example,
requires public assemblies, and in public assemblies people must
appear in some costume, and assume some posture. Whether they shall
shock common sentiment in their attire, or conform to common
practice; whether they shall stand, sit or lie, or whether each
shall be at liberty to determine his own attitude—these are
circumstances; they are the necessary concomitants of the action,
and the church is at liberty to regulate them. Public assemblies,
moreover, cannot be held without fixing the time and place of
meeting; these, too, are circumstances which the church is at
liberty to regulate. Parliamentary assemblies cannot transact their
business with efficiency and despatch—indeed, cannot transact it
decently at all—without committees. Committees, therefore, are
circumstances common to parliamentary societies, which the church,
in her parliaments, is at liberty to appoint. All the details of our
government in relation to the distribution of courts, the number
necessary to constitute a quorum, the times of their meetings, the
manner in which they shall be opened,—all these, and such like, are
circumstances, which, therefore, the church has a perfect right to
arrange. We must carefully distinguish between those circumstances
which attend actions *as actions*—that is, without which the actions
could not be, and those circumstances which, though not essential,
are added as appendages. These last do not fall within the
jurisdiction of the church. She has no right to appoint them. They
are circumstances in the sense that they do not belong to the
substance of the act. They are not circumstances in the sense that
they so surround it that they cannot be separated from it. A liturgy
is a circumstance of this kind, as also the sign of the cross in
baptism, and bowing at the name of Jesus. Owen notes the
distinction."

These great men concur in showing that the circumstances of which
the Confession of Faith speaks as falling under the discretionary
control of the church in the sphere of worship are not superadded
appendages to the acts of worship, which may or may not accompany
them as the church may determine, but are simply
*conditions*necessary either to the performance of the acts or to
their decent and orderly performance—conditions not peculiar to
these acts of the church as a distinctive society, but common to the
acts of all societies. Particular attention is challenged to the
views cited from Gillespie, for the reason that he was a member of
the Westminster Assembly, and of course accurately knew and
expounded the doctrine of that body on this subject. He draws a
clear distinction between what was determinable by Scripture and
what was not. What was not so determinable was left to be determined
by the church; what was so determinable was excluded from her
discretion. Now it is certain that instrumental music was, under the
Jewish dispensation, actually determined by the revealed will of God
as an element in the temple worship. Need it be said that it was,
therefore, not indeterminable? It might have pleased God to
determine it as an element in the worship of the synagogue, and in
like manner it might have pleased him to determine it as an
appendage to that of the christian church. He did not, and
consequently it is prohibited. This conclusively settles the
doctrine of the Westminster Assembly. It intended to teach that
instrumental music was not one of the circumstances indeterminable
by Scripture and committed to the discretion of the church. As the
question here is in regard to the meaning of the circumstances of
which the Confession of Faith treats, this consideration is
absolutely decisive. Instrumental music cannot, without violence to
the Confession, be placed in the category of circumstances
determinable by the church. As, then, it is not commanded it is
forbidden; and they who justify its employment in public worship are
liable to the serious charge of adding to "the counsel of God" which
is "set down" in his Word.



[1] Questions 108, 109, 110. [[back]](#back1)

[2] Questions 50, 51, 52. [[back]](#back2)

[3] Chap. xx., sec. 2. [[back]](#back3)

[4] Chap. xxi., sec. 1. [[back]](#back4)

[5] *Acts of Assembly of Church of Scotland,*1644. [[back]](#back5)

[6] Art., *Organ.* [[back]](#back6)

[7]*Works,*Vol. xiii., pp. 343, 344: London, 1825. [[back]](#back7)

[8] *Hist. Puritans,*Vol. i, p. 76, Choules’s ed., New York, 1863.
[[back]](#back8)

[9] *Ibid.,*p. 93. [[back]](#back9)

[10] *Ibid.,*p. 107. [[back]](#back10)

[11] *Works,*Vol. xv., p. 37, Goold’s ed. [[back]](#back11)

[12] *Works,* Vol. ix., p. 463. [[back]](#back12)

[13] Chap. i. Sec. vi. [[back]](#back13)

[14] *Works,*Vol. xv., pp. 35, 36, Goold’s Ed. [[back]](#back14)

[15] *Works,*Vol. xv., pp. 469, 471, Goold’s ed. [[back]](#back15)

[16] *Works,*in Presbyterian’s Armoury, Vol. i., Pref. p. xii.
[[back]](#back16)

[17] *Works,* in Presbyterian’s Armoury, Vol. i., p. 130.
[[back]](#back17)

[18] *Coll. Writings,*Vol. iv., p. 244, *ff.* [[back]](#back18) \


# HISTORICAL ARGUMENT.

I hope to prove to any candid mind that the historical argument in
overwhelmingly against the use of instrumental music in the public
worship of the Christian church. It has already been shown that it
was not employed, under the Jewish dispensation, in the tabernacle
until it was about to give way to the temple, or in the stated
worship of the synagogue, and that, having been by divine direction
limited to the ritual of the temple, it was, along with the other
distinctive elements of that temporary institute, abolished at the
inauguration of the Christian economy. It has also been evinced that
the Christian church, by an easy transition, carried over into the
new dispensation the simple worship as well as the polity of the
synagogue, modified by the conditions peculiar to that dispensation;
that the employment of instrumental music in Christian worship was
not one of those modifications; for such a modification would have
had the effect of conforming the gospel church to the temple, with
its symbolical and typical rites—a conformity from which even the
synagogue was free; and that the apostles, as the divinely
commissioned and inspired organizers of the New Testament church, so
far from authorizing the use of instrumental music in its worship,
excluded it. The Christian church, it is clear, was started without
it. What has been the subsequent history of the case? In answering
this question, reference will be made to the practice of the church
and to the testimony of some of her leading theologians during the
successive periods of her development.

There is no evidence, but the contrary, to show that instrumental
music was commonly introduced into the church until the thirteenth
century.

The church historians make no mention of it in their accounts of the
worship of the early church. Mosheim says not a word about it.
Neander makes the simple remark: "Church psalmody, also, passed over
from the synagogue into the Christian church." [[1]](#[1]) Dr.
Schaff observes: "He [Christ] sanctioned by his own practice, and
spiritualized, the essential elements of the Jewish cultus."
[[2]](#[2]) They were historians, and could not record a fact which
did not exist.

Bingham, deservedly held in high repute as a writer on Christian
antiquities, and as a member of the Anglican church certainly not
prejudiced in favor of Puritan views, says: [[3]](#[3]) "I should
here have put an end to this chapter, but that some readers would be
apt to reckon it an omission, that we have taken no notice of organs
and bells among the utensils of the church. But the true reason is
that there were no such things in use in the ancient churches for
many ages. Music in churches is as ancient as the apostles, but
instrumental music not so."

In regard to the doctrine of the fathers upon the subject I cannot
do better than give an extract from a learned and able work of the
Rev. James Peirce, [[4]](#[4]) entitled *"A Vindication of the
Dissenters."* "I come now," says he,: [[5]](#[5]) "to say somewhat
of the antiquity of musical instruments. But that these were not
used in the Christian church in the primitive times is attested by
all the ancient writers with one consent. Hence they figuratively
explain all the places of the Old Testament which speak of musical
instruments, as I might easily show by a thousand testimonies out of
Clement of Alexandria, Basil, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustin, Chrysostom,
and many others. . . Chrysostom talks more handsomely: ‘As the Jews
praised God with all kinds of instruments, so are we commanded to
praise him with all the members of our bodies, our eyes,’ etc.
[[6]](#[6]) And Clement of Alexandria talks much to the same
purpose. [[7]](#[7]) Besides, the ancients thought it unlawful to
use those instruments in God’s worship. Thus the unknown author of a
treatise among Justin Martyr’s works: ‘Quest. If songs were invented
by unbelievers with a design of deceiving, and were appointed for
those under the law, because of the childishness of their minds, why
do they who have received the perfect instructions of grace, which
are most contrary to the aforesaid customs, nevertheless sing in the
churches just as they did who were children under the law? Ans.
Plain singing is not childish, but only the singing with lifeless
organs, with dancing and cymbals, etc. Whence the use of such
instruments and other things fit for children is laid aside, and
plain singing only retained.’ [[8]](#[8])

"Chrysostom seems to have been of the same mind, and to have thought
the use of such instruments was rather allowed the Jews in
consideration of their weakness, than prescribed and commanded.
[[9]](#[9]) But that he was mistaken, and that musical instruments
were not only allowed the Jews, as he thought, and Isidorus of
Pelusium (whose testimony I shall mention presently), but were
prescribed by God, may appear from the texts of Scripture I have
before referred to. Clement . . . thought these things fitter for
beasts than for men. [[10]](#[10]) And though Basil highly commends
and stiffly defends the way of singing by turns; yet he thought
musical instruments unprofitable and hurtful. [[11]](#[11]) . . . He
says thus: ‘In such vain arts as the playing upon the harp or pipe,
or dancing, as soon as the action ceases the work itself vanishes.’
So that, really, according to the apostle’s expression, ‘the end of
these things is destruction.’ [[12]](#[12]) Isidore of Pelusium, who
lived since Basil, held music was allowed the Jews by God in a way
of condescension to their childishness: ‘If God’ says he, ‘bore with
bloody sacrifices, because of men’s childishness at that time, why
should you wonder he bore with the music of a harp and a psaltery?’
[[13]](#[13]) . . . From what has been said, it appears no musical
instruments were used in the pure times of the church."

​2. With reference to the time when organs were first introduced
into use in the Roman Catholic Church, let us hear Bingham:
[[14]](#[14]) "It is now generally agreed among learned men that the
use of organs came into the church since the time of Thomas Aquinas,
*Anno* 1250; for he, in his *Summs,*has these words: ‘Our church
does not use musical instruments, as harps and psalteries, to praise
God withal, that she may not seem to Judaize.’ From which our
learned Mr. Gregory, in a peculiar dissertation that he has upon the
subject, concludes that there was no ecclesiastical use of organs in
his time. And the same inference is made by Cajetan and Navarre
among the Romish writers. Mr. Wharton also has observed that Marinus
Sanutus, who lived about the year 1290, was the first who brought
the use of wind-organs into churches, whence he was surnamed
Torcellus, which is the name for an organ in the Italian tongue. And
about this time Durantus, in his *Rationale,*takes notice of them as
received in the church; and he is the first author, as Mr. Gregory
thinks, that so takes notice of them.

"The use of the instrument indeed is much more ancient, but not in
church-service, the not attending to which distinction is the thing
that imposes upon many writers . . . . Nor was it ever received into
the Greek churches, there being no mention of an organ in all their
liturgies, ancient or modern, if Mr. Gregory’s judgment may be
taken. But Durantus, however, contends for their antiquity, both in
the Greek and Latin churches, and offers to prove it, but with ill
success, first, from Julianus Halicarnassensis, a Greek writer,
*Anno* 510, whom he makes to say that organs were used in the church
in his time. But he mistakes the sense of his author, who speaks not
of his own times, but of the time of Job and the Jewish temple. For,
commenting on these words of Job, 30:31, ‘My harp is turned to
mourning, and my organ into the voice of them that weep,’ he says:
‘There was no prohibition to use musical instruments or organs, if
it was done with piety, because they were used in the temple.’ By
which, it is plain, he speaks of the Jewish temple in the singular,
and not of Christian temples or churches in the plural, as Durantus
mistakes him. Next, for the Latin church, he urges the common
opinion which ascribes the invention of them to Pope Vitalian,
*Anno* 660; but his authorities for this are no better than Platina
and the Pontifical, which are little to be regarded against clear
evidences to the contrary. That which some urge out of Clemens
Alexandrinus I shall not answer as Suicerus does, (who, with
Hospinian and some, wholly decrying the use of instrumental music in
Christian churches, says it is an interpolation and corruption of
that ancient author,) but only observe that he speaks not of what
was then in use in Christian churches, but of what might lawfully be
used by any private Christians, if they were disposed to use it;
which rather argues that instrumental music (the lute and harp of
which he speaks) was not in use in the public churches. The same may
be gathered from the words of St. Chrysostom, who says: ‘It was only
permitted to the Jews, as sacrifice was, for the heaviness and
grossness of their souls. God condescended to their weakness,
because they were lately drawn from idols; but now, instead of
organs, we may use our own bodies to praise him withal.’ Theodoret
has many like expressions in his *Comments upon the Psalms*and other
places . . . . So that, there being no use of organs till the
twelfth [thirteenth?] century, I could not speak of them as utensils
in the ancient churches."

Let us pause a moment to notice the fact, supported by a mass of
incontrovertible evidence, that the Christian church did not employ
instrumental music in its public worship for 1200 years after
Christ. It proves, what has been already shown from the New
Testament Scriptures, that the apostolic church did not use it in
its public services, and surely the church ought now to be conformed
to the practice of the apostles and of the churches whose usages
they modeled according to the inspired direction of the Holy Ghost.
It deserves serious consideration, moreover, that notwithstanding
the ever-accelerated drift towards corruption in worship as well as
in doctrine and government, the Roman Catholic Church did not adopt
this corrupt practice until about the middle of the thirteenth
century. This is the testimony of Aquinas, who has always been
esteemed by that church as a theologian of the very first eminence,
and who, of course, was perfectly acquainted with its usages. When
the organ was introduced into its worship it encountered strong
opposition, and made its way but slowly to general acceptance. These
assuredly are facts that should profoundly impress Protestant
churches. How can they adopt a practice which the Roman Church, in
the year 1200, had not admitted, and the subsequent introduction of
which was opposed by some of her best theologians? For example,
Bellarmin, as we have already seen, condemns it as not belonging to
the church perfected in the new dispensation, and Cardinal Cajetan
said: ‘It is to be observed the church did not use organs in
Thomas’s time; whence, even to this day, the Church of Rome does not
use them in the Pope’s presence. And truly it will appear that
musical instruments are not to be suffered in the ecclesiastical
offices we meet together to perform for the sake of receiving
internal instruction from God; and so much the rather are they to be
excluded, because God’s internal discipline exceeds all human
disciplines, which rejected this kind of instruments." [[15]](#[15])
The great scholar, Erasmus, who never formally withdrew from the
communion of the Church of Rome, thus forcibly expresses himself:
"We have brought into our churches a certain operose and theatrical
music; such a confused, disorderly chattering of some words, as I
hardly think was ever heard in any of the Grecian or Roman theatres.
The church rings with the noise of trumpets, pipes and dulcimers;
and human voices strive to bear their part with them . . . . Men run
to church as to a theatre, to have their ears tickled. And for this
end organ-makers are hired with great salaries, and a company of
boys, who waste all their time in learning these whining tones [Ames
translates, ‘this gibble-gabble.’] Pray now compute how many poor
people, in great extremity, might be maintained by the salaries of
those singers." [[16]](#[16])

In spite of this opposition, the organ, during the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries, steadily made its way towards universal triumph
in the Romish church. Then came the Reformation; and the question
arises, How did the Reformers deal with instrumental music in the
church? Did they teach that the Reformation ought to embrace the
expulsion of that kind of music from its services?

I will not appeal to Luther. Eckhard [[17]](#[17]) is referred to as
saying: *"Lutherus organa musica inter Baalis insignia refert,"*
"Luther considers organs among the ensigns of Baal." But the German
reformer expresses a different opinion in his commentary on Amos
6:5.

Zwingle has already been quoted to show that instrumental music was
one of the shadows of the old law which has been realized in the
gospel. He pronounces its employment in the present dispensation
"wicked pervicacity." There is no doubt in regard to his views on
the subject, which were adopted by the Swiss Reformed churches.

Calvin is very express in his condemnation of instrumental music in
connection with the public worship of the Christian church. Besides
the testimonies which have already been adduced to prove that he
regarded it as one of the types of the Old Testament which is
fulfilled in the New, other passages from his writings may be added.
In his commentary on the thirty-third Psalm he says: "There is a
distinction to be observed here, however, that we may not
indiscriminately consider as applicable to ourselves everything
which was formerly enjoined upon the Jews. I have no doubt that
playing upon cymbals, touching the harp and viol, and all that kind
of music, which is so frequently mentioned in the Psalms, was a part
of the education—that is to say, the puerile instruction of the law.
I speak of the stated service of the temple. For even now, if
believers choose to cheer themselves with musical instruments, they
should, I think, make it their object not to dissever their
cheerfulness from the praises of God. But when they frequent their
sacred assemblies, musical instruments in celebrating the praises of
God would be no more suitable than the burning of incense, the
lighting up of lamps, and the restoration of the other shadows of
the law. The Papists, therefore, have foolishly borrowed this, as
well as many other things, from the Jews. Men who are fond of
outward pomp may delight in that noise; but the simplicity which God
recommends to us by the apostle is far more pleasing to him. Paul
allows us to bless God in the public assembly of the saints, only in
a known tongue (1 Cor. 14:16). The voice of man, although not
understood by the generality, assuredly excels all inanimate
instruments of music; and yet we see what Paul determines concerning
speaking in an unknown tongue. What shall we then say of chanting,
which fills the ears with nothing but an empty sound? Does any one
object that music is very useful for awakening the minds of men and
moving their hearts? I own it; but we should always take care that
no corruption creep in, which might both defile the pure worship of
God, and involve men in superstition. Moreover, since the Holy
Spirit expressly warns us of this danger by the mouth of Paul, to
proceed beyond what we are there warranted by him is not only, I
must say, unadvised zeal, but wicked and perverse obstinacy."

On Psalm 150:3-5 he says: "I do not insist upon the words in the
Hebrew signifying the musical instruments; only let the reader
remember that sundry different kinds are here mentioned, *which were
in use under the legal economy,"*etc. On verse 6, "Let everything
that hath breath praise the Lord," he remarks: "As yet the psalmist
has addressed himself in his exhortations to the people who were
conversant with *the ceremonies under the law;*now he turns to men
in general," etc.

In his homily on 1 Sam. 18:1-9, he delivers himself emphatically and
solemnly upon the subject: "In Popery there was a ridiculous and
unsuitable imitation [of the Jews]. While they adorned their
temples, and valued themselves as having made the worship of God
more splendid and inviting, they employed organs, and many other
such ludicrous things, by which the Word and worship of God are
exceedingly profaned, the people being much more attached to those
rites than to the understanding of the divine Word. We know,
however, that where such understanding is not, there can be no
edification, as the apostle Paul teacheth . . . . . What, therefore,
was in use under the law is by no means entitled to our practice
under the gospel; and these things being not only superfluous, but
useless, are to be abstained from, because pure and simple
modulation is sufficient for the praise of God, if it is sung with
the heart and with the mouth. We know that our Lord Jesus Christ has
appeared, and by his advent has abolished these legal shadows.
Instrumental music, we therefore maintain, was only tolerated on
account of the times and the people, because they were as boys, as
the sacred Scripture speaketh, whose condition required these
puerile rudiments. But in gospel times we must not have recourse to
these unless we wish to destroy the evangelical perfection, and to
obscure the meridian light which we enjoy in Christ our Lord."

In these views of his illustrious colleague Beza concurred.
[[18]](#[18]) "If," says he, "the apostle justly prohibits the use
of unknown tongues in the church, much less would he have tolerated
these artificial musical performances which are addressed to the ear
alone, and seldom strike the understanding even of the performers
themselves."

The French Protestant Church, which was organized mainly through the
influence and counsels of Calvin, naturally adopted his views in
regard to worship as well as doctrine and government. Consequently,
as the Reformer did not oppose the use of a moderate and evangelical
liturgy, that church following his lead employed one that was
permissive, that is, not imposed by authority. One may wonder that
Calvin, who unequivocally enounced the great principle that
whatsoever is not commanded is forbidden, did not see the
application of that principle to liturgical services, at least did
not make that application practically. It would be irrelevant to the
design of this discussion to consider that question as one of fact.
We know that the French Reformed Church acted in accordance with his
views on that subject; and it may be said, in passing, that it has
been a matter of observation that the use of a liturgy by the
Huguenot immigrants to this country has been a snare, which has had
influence in leading many of them to abandon the church of their
fathers that was so definitely opposed to prelacy, and identify
themselves with a prelatic communion. Reading the case backward, we
can see that whatever may have been the reasons which governed the
Reformer in declining to apply the mighty principle mentioned to a
liturgy, they have not been sustained by events. And it is somewhat
curious, at least it is a striking circumstance inviting attention
to its causes, that the Scottish and American churches which are now
generally opposed to a liturgy, as Calvin was not, are more and more
adopting instrumental music to which he *was* opposed.

But the fact here emphasized is that the French Reformed Church, in
its day of efficiency and glory, excluded instrumental music from
its services. Nor is the example a mean one. It was that of a great
church, as illustrious an exponent of the principles of
Presbyterianism, with the exception which has just been indicated
and its alliance with the state, as has existed since the days of
the apostles. These principles were not worn as a uniform on parade,
but were maintained through blood and flame. A few extracts from
Quick’s valuable work, *Synodicon in Gallia Reformata,*will
illuminate this point as with a lurid glare. "Whilst," says he,
[[19]](#[19]) "Mystical Babylon, spiritual Sodom and Egypt (where
our Lord hath been in his most precious truths and ordinances, and
in his dearest saints and members, for many ages successively
crucified), did swim in the calm ocean of worldly riches and
grandeur, in the pacific seas of peculiar felicities and pleasures,
poor Zion in that bloody kingdom of France hath been in the storms
and flames, hath passed from one fiery trial to another, from
cauldrons of boiling oil into burning furnaces heated with fire
seven times hotter than before; she hath been driven from populous
cities and the pleasant habitations of men unto the cold, snowy
Lebanon, to the high craggy tops of Amana and Shenir, to the
frightful dens of lions, and to the horrid mountains of dragons and
leopards." Is this extravagant declamation? Let us glance at some of
the facts.

"In the national Synod of Rochelle, in the year 1571, Mr. Beza
presiding in it, the Reformed could count then above two thousand
one hundred and fifty churches; and in many of these above ten
thousand members, and in most of these two ministers, in some they
had five, as in the year 1561 there served the church of Orleans
(which at that time had seven thousand communicants) Anthony
Chanoriet, Lord of Meringeau, Robert Macon, Lord des Fontaines, Hugh
Sureau, Nicholas Fillon, Lord of Valls, and Daniel Tossane, who
afterwards died at Heidelberg in the Palatinate. When the Colloquy
[our Presbytery] of Poissy was held, they had in the one only
province of Normandy three hundred and five pastors of churches, and
in the province of Provence three-score. And I remember the author
of *Le Cabinet du Roy de France, a*book printed in the year 1581,
and dedicated to Henry the Third, makes a computation of their
martyrs to have been in a very few years at least 200,000 cut off
for the gospel, and he makes up his account thus: ‘Allow,’ saith he,
‘but a hundred martyrs to every church, and you have the sum; and
yet ‘tis as clear as the sun at noonday that the sum is vastly more.
For ‘tis a truth incontestable, that there have been cut off by the
sword and massacres for religion from the church of Caen above
15,000 or 16,000, from the church of Alencon 5,000, from the church
of Paris 13,000 from the church of Rheims 12,000, from the church of
Troyes 12,000, from the church of Sens 9,000, from the church of
Orleans 8,000, from the church of Angiers 7,000, and from the church
of Poictiers 12,000 persons, etc.’ *Livre Premier,*pp. 274-277."
[[20]](#[20])

Quick makes this remarkable statement, [[21]](#[21]) which I cannot
forbear quoting, concerning the powerful influence exerted by the
simple singing of psalms upon the French people at the beginning of
the Protestant Reformation: "Clement Marot, a courtier and a great
wit, was advised by Mr. Vatablus, Regius Professor of the Hebrew
tongue in the University of Paris, to consecrate his muse unto God;
which counsel he embraceth and translateth fifty of David’s psalms
into French meter. Mr. Beza did the other hundred and all the
Scripture songs. Lewis Guadimel, another Asaph or Jeduthun, a most
skilful master of music, set those sweet and melodious tunes unto
which they are sung even unto this day. This holy ordinance charmed
the ears, hearts and affections of court and city, town and country.
They were sung in the Louvre, as well as in the Pres-des-Cleres, by
ladies, princes, yea, and by Henry the Second himself. This one
ordinance only contributed mightily to the downfall of Popery, and
the propagation of the gospel. It took so much with the genius of
the nation, that all ranks and degrees of men practised it in the
temples and in their families. No gentleman professing the Reformed
religion would sit down at his table without praising God by
singing. Yea, it was a special part of their morning and evening
worship in their several houses to sing God’s praises. The Popish
clergy raged, and, to prevent the growth and spreading of the gospel
by it, that mischievous Cardinal of Lorraine, another Elymas the
sorcerer, got the odes of Horace and the filthy, obscene poems of
Tibullus and Catullus to be turned into French and sung at the
court. Ribaldry was his piety, and the means used by him to expel
and banish the singing of divine psalms out of the profane court of
France."

Whatever may be the practice in recent times of the churches of
Holland, the Synods of the Reformed Dutch Church, soon after the
Reformation, pronounced very decidedly against the use of
instrumental music in public worship. The National Synod at
Middleburg, in 1581, declared against it, and the Synod of Holland
and Zealand, in 1594, adopted this strong resolution: "That they
would endeavor to obtain of the magistrate the laying aside of
organs, and the singing with them in the churches, even out of the
time of worship, either before or after sermons." The Provincial
Synod of Dort also inveighed severely against their use.

Some testimonies are added from distinguished continental
theologians. Pareus, commenting on 1 Cor. 14:7, says: "In the
Christian church the mind must be incited to spiritual joy, not by
pipes and trumpets and timbrels, with which God formerly indulged
his ancient people on account of the hardness of their hearts, but
by psalms and hymns and spiritual songs."

"Instrumental music," remarks Zepperus, [[22]](#[22]) "in the
religious worship of the Jews, belonged to the ceremonial law, which
is now abolished. It is evident that it is contrary to the precept
and rule of Paul, who (1 Cor. 14.) wills that in Christian
assemblies everything should be done for edification, that others
may understand and be reformed; so even that of speaking in unknown
tongues should be banished from the church; much less should that
jarring organic music, which produceth a gabbling of many voices, be
allowed, with its pipes and trumpets and whistles, making our
churches resound, nay, bellow and roar . . . . In some of the
Reformed churches these musical instruments are retained, but they
are not played until the congregation is dismissed, all the parts of
divine worship being finished. And they are then used for a
political [civil] purpose, to gratify those who seek pleasure from
sound and harmony."

Molerus, on the 150^th^ Psalm, observes: "It is no wonder,
therefore, that such a number of musical instruments should be so
heaped together; but although they were a part of the *Paedagogia
Legalis*[the instruction of the law], yet they were not for that
reason to be brought into Christian assemblies. For God willeth
that, after the coming of Christ, his people should cultivate the
hope of eternal life and the practice of true piety by very
different and more simple means than these." [[23]](#[23])

Gisbertus Voetius argues at length against the use of instrumental
music in churches in his *Ecclesiastical Polity,* a work which is
held in high estimation among Presbyterians. [[24]](#[24]) The
argument is characterized by the great ability for which the author
was noted, but it is too elaborate to be here cited.

It might seem hopeless to get from the Church of England a testimony
against the employment of instruments in worship; but when her first
love was warmed by the blessed influence of the reformation from
Popery, she spoke in no uncertain sounds on the subject. In her
homily "Of the Place and Time of Prayer" these notable words occur:
"God’s vengeance hath been and is daily provoked, because much
wicked people pass nothing to resort to the church; either for that
they are so sore blinded that they understand nothing of God or
godliness, and care not with devilish example to offend their
neighbors; or else for that they see the church altogether scoured
of such gay, gazing sights as their gross phantasie was greatly
delighted with; because they see the false religion abandoned and
the true restored, which seemeth an unsavory thing to their unsavory
taste; as may appear by this, that a woman said to her neighbor,
‘Alas, gossip, what shall we now do at church, since all the saints
are taken away; since all the goodly sights we were wont to have are
gone; since we cannot hear the like piping, singing, chaunting, and
playing upon the organs that we could before!’ But, dearly beloved,
we ought greatly to rejoice and give God thanks that our churches
are delivered out of all those things which displeased God so sore
and filthily defiled his holy house and his place of prayer."

The thirty-two godly and learned commissioners appointed by King
Edward VI. to reform ecclesiastical laws and observances submitted
the following advice: [[25]](#[25]) "In reading chapters and singing
psalms, ministers and clergymen must think of this diligently, that
God is not only to be praised by them, but that others are to be
brought to perform the same worship by their counsel and example.
Wherefore, let them pronounce their words distinctly, and let their
singing be clear and easy, that everything may be understood by the
auditors. So that ‘tis our pleasure, that the quavering operose
music which is called *figured*should be wholly laid aside
[[26]](#[26]) since it often makes such a noise in the ears of the
people that they cannot understand what is said." "Certainly,"' says
Ames in answer to the taunts of Dr. Burgess, "these were neither
distracted nor stupid men; whence their prejudice came, let the
Rejoinder himself judge." [[27]](#[27])

"In the English Convocation, held in the year 1562, in Queen
Elizabeth’s time, for settling the Liturgy, the retaining of the
custom of kneeling at the sacrament, of the cross in baptism, and of
organs, carried only by the casting vote." [[28]](#[28])
Hetherington’s account of the matter is as follows: [[29]](#[29])
"In the beginning of the year 1562, a meeting of the Convocation was
held, in which the subject of further reformation was vigorously
discussed on both sides . . . [Among the alterations proposed was
this]: ‘That the use of organs be laid aside.’ When the vote came to
be taken, on these propositions, forty-three voted for them and
thirty-five against; but when the proxies were counted, the balance
was turned; the final state of the vote being fifty-eight for and
fifty-nine against. Thus it was determined by a single vote, and
that the proxy of an absent person who did not hear the reasoning
that the Prayer-Book should remain unimproved, that there should be
no further reformation, that there should be no relief granted to
those whose consciences felt aggrieved by the admixture of human
inventions in the worship of God."

In 1564, during Queen Elizabeth’s reign, considerable discussion was
had touching the use of vestments in public worship. Bishop Horn
wrote to Gualter at Zurich about the matter. He and Bullinger
replied to him recommending moderation. Whereupon Samson and
Humphrey, in February, 1565, wrote to the Zurich divines giving "a
copious account of the grounds on which they founded their refusal
to obey" the orders of the Queen and Parliament: Bullinger answered
them by again recommending moderation. [[30]](#[30]) This letter of
Bullinger to Samson and Humphrey was sent to Horn and Grindal, who
published it. "Upon this Samson and Humphrey wrote to Zurich
complaining of the printing their letter, and carried their
complaints much further than to the matter of the vestments: they
complained of the music and organs, of making sponsors in baptism
answer in the child’s name, of the Court of Faculties, and the
praying for dispensations." [[31]](#[31])

These facts are sufficient to show that thc Church of England was at
one time on the verge of eliminating instrumental music along with
other relics of Popery from her public services; and had she been
thoroughly reformed in accordance with the wishes of her purest
divines she would have conformed her practice, in this matter, to
that of the Reformed churches on the continent. But the taste and
the will of an arbitrary female head of the church determined her
usages in a contrary direction. The history deserves to be pondered
most seriously.

What were the views of the English Puritans on this subject has
already been indicated when the question was under consideration in
regard to the position assumed concerning it by the Westminster
Assembly of Divines. It is not necessary to exhibit their sentiments
by further appeals to authority. To their almost unanimous
opposition to instrumental music in the public worship of the
church, as unscriptural and Popish, there were some exceptions,
among whom was the justly celebrated Richard Baxter, a great man,
but neither a great Calvinist nor a great Presbyterian. Those who
wish to see his arguments in favor of a temperate employment of
instrumental music in church-worship can find them in the fifth
volume of his works, edited by Orme, page 499: arguments about as
weak as those by which he attempted to support the Grotian theory of
the atonement. As they may, to some extent, be considered in the
examination of the arguments in favor of instrumental music, they
will not be noticed in this place. I cannot pass from this reference
to the English Puritans without pausing to express the conviction
that, whatever may have been some of their peculiar
characteristics—and even these have been magnified and caricatured
by opponents who were partly or wholly destitute of their religious
earnestness—no purer exponents of the truth of God as set forth in
the Holy Scriptures have existed on earth since the days of the
apostles; and the growing defection from the views they maintained
touching the purity of worship, which now conspicuously marks the
English-speaking non-prelatic churches, carries in it the ominous
symptoms of apostasy from the gospel. Some few yet stand firm
against what is now called, in a painfully significant phrase, the
"down-grade" tendencies of this age. Prominent among them is that
eminent servant of Christ—a star in his right hand—the Rev. Charles
H. Spurgeon, who not only proclaims with power the pure doctrines of
God’s Word, but retains and upholds an apostolic simplicity of
worship. The great congregation which is blessed with the privilege
of listening to his instructions has no organ "to assist" them in
singing their praises to their God and Saviour. They find their
vocal organs sufficient. Their tongues and voices express the
gratitude of their hearts.

It is almost needless to cite the example of the Church of Scotland.
She was—with the exception of an unholy alliance between the church
and the state, a baneful source of incalculable evils, "a spring of
woes unnumbered," to the former—a glorious instance of church as
completely reformed as could be expected in this present, imperfect,
pre-millennial condition. Even the permissive liturgy of John Knox
she soon threw off as a swathing band from her free limbs, and for
centuries she knew nothing of instrumental music in her public
services. Would that she now retained this primitive purity of
worship! But within a half-century back, in consequence of the
agitation persistently pursued by some who clamored for a more
artistic "celebration" of worship, the Established Church relaxed
its testimony, and consented to make the question of instrumental
music all "open" one—that is, the matter was left to the option of
individual congregations. Meanwhile the Free Church stood firm, and
has so stood until recently. Dr. Begg, in his work on organs, could
express his gratitude for the conservative attitude of his church on
the subject, and Dr. Candlish deprecated the discussion of the
question as fraught with peril. But they have fallen asleep, and the
church of their love is now, by the action of her Presbyteries,
making it an "open question." The floodgates are up, and the result
is by no means uncertain: the experience of the American
Presbyterian Church will be that of the Scottish.

The Irish Presbyterian Church has for years seriously debated the
question in her General Assembly. So far she has refused to make it
an open one; but the pressure of a heavy minority, it may almost
with certainty be expected, will prevail in breaking through the
dykes of scriptural conservatism. The fact, however, that to the
present hour that noble church maintains its opposition to
instrumental music contributes no unimportant element to the
historical argument against its use. It is likely that the question
has never been subjected to so thorough-going an examination as it
has met in the protracted discussions of her supreme court. She is
now almost the last great witness for the simple singing of praise
in public worship. Should the standard of her testimony go down, it
must be left to small, seceded bodies, or to individuals, to
continue the witness-bearing and the contest for a simplicity of
worship from which the majority in the church have apostatized.

The non-prelatic churches, Independent and Presbyterian, began their
development on the American continent without instrumental music.
They followed the English Puritans and the Scottish Church, which
had adopted the principles of the Calvinistic Reformed Church. How
the organ came to be gradually introduced into them it were bootless
to inquire. They began right, but have more and more departed from
the simple genius of Christian worship. On what grounds they have
done this it would be well for them to stop and inquire. For if
there be any force in argument, their present position cannot be
maintained. It is a clear departure from the practice of the church,
both early and reformed. The United Presbyterian Church has but
recently given way. A respectable minority opposes the defection,
but what the issue will be events do not yet furnish sufficient data
to determine. The Associate Reformed Church has not yet receded from
the pure principles and practice of their forefathers. May God grant
them grace to continue in their maintenance! The time may ere long
come when those who stand on these principles and refuse to yield to
the demands of a latitudinarian age will be attracted by adherence
to a common sentiment towards a formal union with each other. It may
be made a question whether the retention of a pure gospel-worship
does not constitute a reason for the existence of a distinctive
organization.

It has thus been proved, by an appeal to historical facts, that the
church, although lapsing more and more into defection from the truth
and into a corruption of apostolic practice, had no instrumental
music for twelve hundred years; and that the Calvinistic Reformed
Church ejected it from its services as an element of Popery, even
the Church of England having come very nigh to its extrusion from
her worship. The historical argument, therefore, combines with the
scriptural and the confessional to raise a solemn and powerful
protest against its employment by the Presbyterian Church. It is
heresy in the sphere of worship.


[1] *Hist.*Vol. i., p. 304. [[back]](#back1)

[2] *Hist. Apos. Ch.,*p. 345; see also *Hist. Chris. Ch.,* Vol. i.,
pp. 120, 121. [[back]](#back2)

[3] *Works,*Vol, iii., p. 137. [[back]](#back3)

[4] A Non-Conformist; died 1726. [[back]](#back4)

[5] Pt. iii., Ch. iii.; London, 1717. [[back]](#back5)

[6] In Ps. cl. [[back]](#back6)

[7] *Paedag.,*Lib. ii., C. 4. [[back]](#back7)

[8] *Resp. ad Orthodox.,*Q. 107. [[back]](#back8)

[9] In Ps. cl. [[back]](#back9)

[10] *Paedag.,*Lib. ii., C. iv., p. 163. [[back]](#back10)

[11] *Comm. in Isa.,*C. v., pp. 956, 957. [[back]](#back11)

[12] P. 955. [[back]](#back12)

[13] *Epist.,*Lib. 2, ep. 176. [[back]](#back13)

[14] *Works,*Vol. iii., p. 137, *ff.*[[back]](#back14)

[15] Hoffm. Lex., *voce Musica,*quoted by Peirce. [[back]](#back15)

[16] In 1 Cor. 14:19, cited by Peirce and Ames. [[back]](#back16)

[17] A German theologian. He argued in favor of instrumental music
against Calvin. [[back]](#back17)

[18] *In Colloq. Mompelg.,*Pars 2, p. 26. [[back]](#back18)

[19] *Epistle Dedicatory.* [[back]](#back19)

[20]*Introduction,*pp. lix., lx. [[back]](#back20)

[21]*Ibid.,*p. v. [[back]](#back21)

[22]*De Lege Mosaica,*Lib. iv. [[back]](#back22)

[23] The three foregoing testimonies are extracted from the report
of a committee to the Presbytery of Glasgow in 1808.
[[back]](#back23)

[24] *Pars* i. *Cap.*iii., *De Organis et Cantu Organico in Sacris.*
[[back]](#back24)

[25]*Reform. Leg. de Div. Offic.,*Cap. v. [[back]](#back25)

[26] *"Vibratam illam et operosam musicam, quae figurata dicitur,
auferri placet."* [[back]](#back26)

[27] *Church Cerem.,*p. 406. [[back]](#back27)

[28] *Dr. Henry’s Hist., Strype’s Annals,* p. 363. [[back]](#back28)

[29] *Hist. Westminster Assembly,* p. 30. [[back]](#back29)

[30] One is here reminded of Luther’s words: "Too much discretion is
displeasing to God." [[back]](#back30)

[31] The author of *Primitive Truth,*citing Bp. Burner,
*Reformation,*Vol. iii., pp. 308-310. [[back]](#back31) \


# ARGUMENTS IN FAVOR OF INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC CONSIDERED.

IN the preceding argument the appeal has been taken to the
Scriptures and to the Presbyterian standards as interpreting them;
and historical proofs of the practice of the church have, in
addition, been presented chiefly for the purpose of showing what was
the usage of the apostles and of the churches which they organized.
Any arguments produced in favor of instrumental music in the public
worship of the church must profess to be grounded in the same
considerations—that is, they must assume to be derived from the same
sources as those from which the foregoing proofs have been sought,
or they are to be regarded as unworthy of answers. Those founded
upon human taste or wisdom trifle with the gravity of the subject.
They refer to a standard which can have no possible authority in a
question which concerns the public worship of God. Such are the
common arguments, for example, that instrumental music assists
devotion, that it stimulates and exalts religious feeling, and that
it imparts dignity, grace and attractiveness to the services of the
church. They are all based upon expediency, and are therefore
irrelevant to the consideration of a question which can only be
legitimately decided by the expressed authority of God. There is no
middle ground between submission to God’s revealed will and a
worship dictated by the fancies of sinners. Only two sorts of
argument consequently, will now be examined:

​1. Those which profess to be derived immediately from the
Scriptures.

(1.) It is urged that God himself has sanctioned the use of
instrumental music in public worship, and the Scriptures are pleaded
in proof of this assertion. Surely what God has approved must be
right; it cannot be condemned by man. The fallacy here consists in
the affirmation that what God approved at a certain place, at a
certain time, and in certain circumstances, he approves at all
places, at all times, and in all circumstances. It is forgotten that
there is a distinction between moral laws founded in the eternal
nature of God, which are immutable, and positive enactments grounded
in the special determinations of his will, which may be changed at
his pleasure. He gave to Adam permission to eat of the tree of life
in Paradise; he revoked it when he fell. He commanded his people in
the old dispensation to observe circumcision and the passover; he
has in the new changed that enactment, and commands them to observe
baptism and the Lord’s supper. He once commanded them to offer
bloody sacrifices, and to observe other special rites at the temple;
he now commands them to refrain from what were at that time binding
duties. And even during the time when it was obligatory to offer
sacrificial and typical worship at a certain place—the temple, he
forbade them to present it at another place—the synagogue. In like
manner, there was a time when he positively commanded the use of
instrumental music at the temple and prohibited its use in the
synagogue; and since the temple with its distinctive services has
passed away, he forbids the employment of it now in any place. God
approved circumcision, the passover, the offering of sacrifice, meat
offerings, drink offerings, ablutions, and the like. Therefore he
approves them at all times, and approves them now. Such is the logic
of the argument under consideration. Will the Christian now
circumcise his children, eat the passover, offer sacrifices, bloody
and unbloody, and employ ablutions in his worship? Why not? Did not
God once approve them? The reed pierces the hand that leans upon it.
The argument proves too much, and is in many respects confessed to
be worthless. God did once approve instrumental music. Granted; but
does that show that he approves it now? On the contrary, he condemns
it now. It was one of those positive enactments which he has been
pleased to change. It may be replied, that when he has willed the
disuse of an ancient ordinance, he has substituted another in its
place; baptism, for instance, in the room of circumcision, and the
Lord’s supper in lieu of the passover; but the same does not hold in
regard to instrumental music. But, in the first place, this is not
universally true. What has he substituted for sacrificial worship?
In the second place, he has substituted simple singing in the place
of singing with the accompaniment of instruments. In a word, God
once approved the whole ritual of the temple. He disapproves it now;
and he who would introduce any part of it into the Christian church
turns Jew and revolts from Christ to Moses. This is true of
instrumental music, as has been already proved.

(2.) Instrumental music is not condemned or prohibited in the New
Testament Scriptures. This position could be consistently taken only
by a Prelatist of the Ritualistic school, who contends that the
church is clothed with a discretionary power to decree rites and
ceremonies; and we have seen that even the Convocation of the
English Church that adopted the Thirty-nine Articles did not
incorporate into them such a principle. To those who cherish a
respect for the doctrines of the Reformed Church, of the English
Puritans, and of the Church of Scotland the principle is of cardinal
value, that whatsoever is not commanded, either explicitly or
implicitly, in the New Testament Scriptures is forbidden to the New
Testament church. It is enough to them that those Scriptures are
silent concerning any practice, to secure its exclusion from the
services of the church. It has at the outset of this discussion been
shown, that under the Old Testament dispensation a divine warrant
was necessary to the introduction of any element into the public
worship of God’s house. Every thing was shut out in respect to which
it could be said that God "commanded it not;" and in those instances
in which his silence was taken advantage of to inject into his
worship what the will or wisdom of man dictated, his anger smoked
against the invader of his prerogative. What proof is there that the
same principle does not prevail in the new dispensation? The New
Testament closes with the prohibitory statute, enforced in the Old
Testament Scriptures, against adding to or taking from the words of
God. Nothing is left to human discretion but those natural
circumstances which condition the actions of all human societies.
The Scriptures are sufficient for all the wants of the church.

Their prescriptions thoroughly furnish the man of God for all good
works. He who advocates the infusion into the worship of the church
of what God has not authorized takes the ground that the Scriptures
are not sufficient, and that human wisdom is entitled to supplement
its defects; he claims to be wiser than the Head of the church
himself.

Instrumental music is prohibited by the absence of any warrant in
the New Testament for its use; it is prohibited by the declaration
that the temple-worship, with all its peculiar appurtenances, is
abolished; it is prohibited by the fact that it-is not included in
the inspired enumeration of the elements of public worship; and it
is prohibited by the practice of the apostles, which must be deemed
regulative of the customs of the church by all who revere the
authority of inspiration.

(3.) Instrumental music is justified in the church on earth by the
consideration that it is represented as employed in the church in
heaven. Are we not to be heavenly-minded? Whether the language of
the Apocalyptic seer is to be interpreted literally or not, whether
harpers will harp on real harps in heaven or not, it is not material
to the present purpose to determine. If it be admitted that
instrumental music will be employed in heaven, this argument will
not be helped. It would be invalid, because it would prove too much.
All that the glorified saints will experience in heaven cannot, from
the nature of the case, be realized on earth. They will not need to
confess and deplore continually recurring sins, but we are obliged
to do so below. They will sing, but they will hardly chant in
mournful strains:

>  "Show pity, Lord, O Lord, forgive, \
>  Let a repenting rebel live; \
>  Are not thy mercies large and free, \
>  May not a sinner trust in thee? \
>  "Should sudden vengeance seize my breath, \
>  I must pronounce thee just in death; \
>  And if my soul were sent to hell, \
>  Thy righteous law approves it well."

Thus we sing, however, till our dying breath. One of the holiest
ministers I ever knew, at ninety-three years of age, on the verge of
his translation to glory, wrote that he was constrained to sing
those penitential words. It is not likely that they wet the
sacramental bread with the tears of penitence, but this we do while
we obey the injunction of our Lord, "Do this in remembrance of me."
They neither marry nor are given in marriage, but it would scarcely
be legitimate for us to argue from their example to what our
practice should be. If we did, the church on earth would be, as Owen
says, in the condition of the kingdom of the Romans when it
consisted only of men, "it had like to have been the matter of a
single generation." They cannot be conceived as beseeching sinners
to be reconciled to God, but we, should we imitate them in this
regard, would in discharge our duty to the unconverted souls around
us. But enough. It is plain that the argument proves too much, and
is, therefore, nothing worth. It tries to prove from the heavenly
world what we have seen some endeavoring to prove from the Jewish
temple. Both arguments burst from their own plethora. If God had
commanded us to do what is done in heaven, we might make the effort
to obey, whatever might be the success or failure attending it; but
until such command can be produced, we are not warranted to turn
harpers and harp upon harps in the church on earth.

(4.) The use of instrumental music in the church is justified upon
the scriptural principle that we ought to consecrate every talent we
possess to the service of God. This argument is also futile, because
it proves too much. It would prove that the sculptor should install
his statues in the sanctuary, that the painter should hang his
pictures upon its walls, that the mechanic should contribute the
products of his skill as "object-lessons" for the elucidation of
gospel truths, and that the architect should, by massive piles,
express the greatness of God, and by the multiplicity of their
minute details the manifoldness of his works. Avaunt! The argument
is suited only to a Papist.

(5.) Instrumental music is among the *Adiaphora*—the things
indifferent. The law of liberty entitles us to its use. The answer
is easy. That law exempts us, in things sacred, from obedience to
the commandments of men, and, so far as our individual consciences
are concerned, from compliance with their scruples and crotchets.
But it cannot free us from the obligation to obey God. Now, God
commanded the Jews to use instrumental music at the temple, and did
not command them to employ it in the tabernacle for most part of its
existence, or in the synagogue. They obeyed him in both respects. It
is manifest that it was not a thing indifferent with them. Neither
is it with Christians. The truth is, that it is an abuse of language
to rank among things indifferent any concomitant of public worship
which becomes a part and parcel of it. On the contrary, it has in
these remarks been shown that, so far from being in that category,
there is nothing about which the living God expresses so vehement a
jealousy as the method in which men approach him in worship.
Indifferent? Nadab and Abihu thought so, but they made a dreadful
mistake.

But if instrumental music is regarded as a thing indifferent, it is
conceded that it is not necessary; it may or may not be used; it is
not required by duty. Here, then, the law of charity comes in, and
challenges obedience. It is, of course, admitted that, on the
supposition, the liberty of the individual is not bound, so far as
his views and his private acts are involved, but his practice, in
the presence of brethren whom he may deem weak, is bound by the law
of charity. Is not this the principle asserted by the inspired
apostle in regard to the eating of meat offered to idols? He
affirmed the liberty of the believer to eat of it. But the law of
individual liberty was checked by the weaker conscience of his
brother, to which the law of charity required that respect be shown.
Paul maintained his perfect right to eat, but declared: "If meat
make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world
standeth, lest I make my brother to offend." His private liberty
was, in the presence of a weak brother, not only restrained, but
controlled by the higher law of love. If, therefore, a believer
chooses to regale himself with the melody or harmony of instruments,
he is not bound; but if instrumental music in public worship
stumbles the consciences of brethren, regarded, though they may be,
as entertaining groundless scruples about it, as, confessedly, it is
not a matter of obligation, should not the law of charity lead its
advocates to say: "If instrumental music in public worship make our
brethren to offend, we will not employ it while the world standeth,
lest we make our brethren to offend." There are those who, when they
hear it, pray that God will not hold them responsible for its use in
his sanctuary. They are sincere; and if it be a thing indifferent,
why should it not, for their sake, be discarded? The law of
brotherly charity asks, Why? That law certainly takes precedence of
the liberty to gratify taste, and its infraction cannot be
unattended with guilt.

​2. Arguments derived from the Confession of Faith:

(1.) It is not claimed, so far as I know, by the advocates of
instrumental music that it is necessary to any performance at all of
the act of singing praise, but it is claimed that it is necessary to
the "decent and orderly" performance of that act. It is justified by
an appeal to the last clause of the following sentence of the
Confession of Faith, about which so much has been said in the course
of the foregoing argument: "There are some circumstances concerning
the worship of God and government of the church, common to human
actions and societies, which are to be ordered by the light of
nature and Christian prudence, *according to the general rules of
the Word, which are always to be observed."* [[1]](#[1]) Among these
general rules of the Word cited in the proof-texts, supporting this
whole statement, beginning, "there are some circumstances," is the
following: "Let all things be done decently and in order." This, it
is claimed, warrants the use of instrumental music. Among the "all
things" to "be done decently and in order" is the singing of praise,
and instrumental music is necessary to this thing being "done
decently and in order."

*First,*It must be observed that the last clause of the statement of
the Confession, the clause which is used in this argument for
instrumental music, has reference to the "circumstances" mentioned
in that statement. It is these circumstances, and not something else
different from them, in regard to which "the general rules of the
Word," including this one, "Let all things be done decently and in
order," "are always to be observed." Now it has already been clearly
pointed out that these circumstances are circumstances "common to
human actions and societies." It is precisely such circumstances
concerning which the statement of the Confession enjoins that they
be ordered according to the general rules of the Word. It is
precisely such circumstances, consequently, that that statement
requires to "be done decently and in order." The question before us,
then, is this: Is instrumental music one of those circumstances? It
has, in a previous part of this discussion, by a somewhat
painstaking argument, been proved that it cannot be one of them.
Those circumstances have been shown to be undistinctive conditions
upon which the actions of all societies are performed. They are
common to them all. But instrumental music is not common to the
actions of all societies. It cannot, therefore, be one of the
circumstances indicated by the statement in the Confession. The
conclusion is irresistible that, so far as that statement is
concerned, it is not necessary to the decent and orderly performance
of the singing of praise as a part of church-worship. This
particular argument in favor of instrumental music will be still
further considered as the discussion draws towards its close.

*Secondly,*The argument takes on the aspect of preposterous
arrogance, as containing an indictment of the true church of God in
almost all the centuries of the Christian era for an indecent and
disorderly singing of praise in its public worship, not to speak of
the church in the old dispensation in its ordinary Sabbath-day
services. It would be folly to test the question of the decent and
orderly, or the indecorous and disorderly, singing of praise by a
temporary standard, especially one erected in a modern and corrupt
condition of the nominal church. Shall the standard by which the
practice of the Christian church—leaving out of account the
Jewish—for twelve centuries is to be judged be one in which the
Church of Rome slowly and reluctantly acquiesced as late as the
middle or the close of the thirteenth century? And by this standard
will we convict of indecorous and disorderly worship the Reformed
churches of Europe, the Swiss, the French and the Dutch, the
churches of Scotland for centuries, the English Puritans and the
Presbyterian Church of Ireland? Has it been left to the church in
these latter days to discover the only decorous and orderly way in
which God’s praises shall be sung? The supposition is intolerable.

The same considerations avail against the plea that instrumental
music is a help in the singing of praise. If the church of Christ
has not felt the need of this help during the greater part of its
existence, it requires no argument to show that she can do without
it now. It may be admitted that it is a help to such "rendering" (!)
of singing as is demanded by ears cultivated for the enjoyment of
Italian operas and the like artistic performances. But that is quite
a different thing from admitting that it is a help to the singing of
praise by humble and penitent sinners, by the afflicted people of
God passing as cross-bearing pilgrims through a world to which they
are crucified and which is crucified to them. The discussion is
gratuitous and needless. It is sufficient to say, that that cannot
be a true help to worship which the Being to be worshipped does not
himself approve.

(2.) It is contended that instrumental music is to be ranked among
the circumstances allowed by the Confession of Faith, and that this
is proved by the fact that it is on the same foot as other
circumstances about which there is no dispute: such as houses of
worship, reading sermons, the length of sermons, of prayers and of
singing, bells, tuning-forks and pitch-pipes, tune-books, and the
like.

One would be entitled to meet this argument upon the general ground
already so often and earnestly maintained, that all the
circumstances remitted by the Confession to the discretion—the
natural judgment—of the church are common to human actions and
societies, and are such as belong to the natural sphere in which the
acts of all societies are performed, and, therefore, cannot be
distinctively spiritual or even ecclesiastical. As instrumental
music, used in professedly spiritual and actually ecclesiastical
worship, cannot possibly be assigned to that category, it is for
that patent reason ruled out by the very terms of the Confession’s
statement. This ground I hold to be impregnable. But inasmuch as it
is a fact that certain minds do consider instrumental music as
saveable to the church for the reason that it may be viewed as
standing on the same foot with the circumstances which have been
mentioned, I will endeavor to meet their difficulties, albeit at the
conscious expense of strict logical consistency, by following this
argument into its minute details; and I pray that the Spirit of God
may bestow his guidance in this last step of the discussion.

*First,*It has been argued, that the use of instrumental music is a
circumstance of the same kind with the building of a house of
worship and the selection of its arrangements; that it is not an
absolutely necessary condition of the church’s acts that it should
hold its meetings in edifices: they might be held, as has often in
fact been done, in the open air. To this the obvious reply is, that
this circumstance is one common to the acts of all societies. They
must meet somewhere, and it is of course competent to all of them to
determine, whether they shall be subjected to the inconveniences of
open-air assemblages, or avail themselves of the advantages afforded
by buildings. So of the arrangements and furniture of the edifices
in which they convene. Every society, even an infidel society, has
this circumstance conditioning its meetings and acts, either as
necessary to any performance of them or as necessary to their
decorous and orderly discharge. But instrumental music is not such a
circumstance: it is not common to human actions and societies. This
destroys the alleged analogy, and consequently the argument founded
upon it fails.

*Secondly,*The same disproof is applicable to the assumed analogy
between the alleged circumstance of instrumental music and that of
reading sermons. It is urged that a sermon must be delivered in one
of two ways: either with or without reading, and there is discretion
left to the church to elect between them. If she thinks reading the
better way, she is at liberty to employ it. So with the choice of
instrumental music as a mode in which praise shall be sung. There
might be, as there has been, some discussion in regard to the
legitimacy of reading sermons. But that question aside, and the
argument being considered on its own ground, it is sufficient to
reply that the analogy asserted does not obtain. The delivery of
discourses, speeches, reports and resolutions is an act common to
all human societies. Now, it is competent to all societies to say
whether they shall be simply spoken or read, whether the delivery
shall be extemporaneous or from manuscript. They can, each for
itself, determine the circumstance of the mode in which an act
common to all shall be performed. But the singing of praise in the
worship of God is not an act common to all societies. It is
therefore not one in regard to which the Confession grants the
liberty to the church of fixing the circumstance of the mode in
which it shall be done. [[2]](#[2])

*Thirdly,*The same line of argument, it is contended, holds good
with reference to the discretionary power of the church to order the
circumstances of the length of sermons, of prayers, and of singing.
But, it is replied, all societies must, of necessity, fix the time
allotted to their several exercises, or their meetings would be
failures. Nature itself dictates this. The church, therefore, has
the natural right to order this circumstance in connection with all
her services. But the question of determining the length of an
exercise is a very different one from that of introducing the
exercise at all. There is no analogy between the determination of
the time to be allowed to all acts, and the determination of the
legitimacy of some special act. The adjustment of the length of its
exercises is a circumstance common to all societies. The employment
of instrumental music, as a concomitant of worship, is a
circumstance peculiar to the church as a distinctive society. The
analogy in every respect breaks down.

*Fourthly,*If the church has bells, it is asked, why may it not have
organs? They are both instruments of sound which serve an
ecclesiastical purpose. The answer is so obvious that one feels
almost ashamed to give it. The bell is not directly connected with
worship; the organ is. The bell stops ringing before the worship
begins, the organ accompanies the worship itself. There is not the
least likeness between them, so far as this question is concerned. A
bell simply marks the time for assembling. So does a clock; and we
may as well institute a comparison between the hands of the clock at
a certain hour and instruments music in worship after that hour, as
between the sound of the bell and it. The question is in regard to a
concomitant of worship, not as to something that precedes it and
gives way to it.

*Fifthly,*It is by some gravely contended that if tuning-forks and
pitch-pipes may be used, so may organs. The same answer as was
returned to the immediately foregoing argument is pertinent here.
Did those who submit this argument ever notice the use made of a
tuning-fork or a pitch-pipe by a leader of singing? It is struck or
sounded in a way to be heard by the leader himself, and when by
means of it he has got the pitch of the tune to be sung, it is put
into his pocket, where it snugly and silently rests while the
singing proceeds. It no more accompanies the worship than does a
bell. Like it, it stops sounding before the act of worship begins.
What analogy is there between it and an instrument that accompanies
every note of the singing by a corresponding note of its own. Assign
to the organ the same office as the humbler tuning-fork or
pitch-pipe, namely, merely to give the leader of the simple singing
the pitch of the tunes, and who would object to it? The question of
organs would be as quiet as they would be. One toot before the
singing, and then they would be, what they ought to be during the
public singing of praise, as silent as the grave. One cannot help
wondering that the admirers of this "majestic instrument" would
employ a comparison which reduces it to a pitch so low!

*Sixthly,*There is only one other argument of this minute class
which will be considered. It is one which I have known some brethren
to maintain as men do a last redoubt. It is argued that instrumental
music is just as fairly entitled to rank among the circumstances
indicated by the Confession of Faith as is a tune-book. Does a
tune-book assist the singing of praise? So does an organ. If the
church has discretion in employing one kind of assistance to
singing, why not another?

Has it not occurred to the minds of those who insist so strenuously
upon this view that they may be using a tune-book to accomplish an
office to which it may be inadequate, when they wield it to knock
down arguments derived from the Old Testament and the New Testament
Scriptures, from the old dispensation and the new, from the practice
of the Jewish synagogue, of the apostles, of the whole church for
twelve hundred years, and of the Calvinistic Reformed Church for
centuries? Does it not occur to them also that there may be a flaw
in the statement of their argument? Expanded, it is this: Whatever
*assists*the singing of praise is a legitimate circumstance; the
tune-book and the organ alike assist, etc., therefore they are alike
legitimate circumstances. The true statement would be, whatever is
*necessary*to the singing of praise is a legitimate circumstance;
the tune-book and the organ are alike so necessary; therefore they
are alike legitimate circumstances. It behooves them to show that
the organ is necessary to the singing of praise. It is not enough to
say that it assists it. They cannot prove its necessity. Praise has
been and is sung without the organ. But it also behooves me to show
that the tune-book is necessary to the singing of praise, that it is
a condition without which it could not be done. If this can be
evinced, as the organ is not necessary to singing, it does not, as
is assumed, stand on the same foot with the tune-book, and the
argument is unfounded.

It will be granted that a tune is necessary to modulated
singing—that is, to singing which is not merely the prolongation of
a single note, and that could not be denominated singing. But the
tune-book gives the tune. The tune is necessary to singing; the
tune-book is necessary to the tune; therefore the tune-book is
necessary to singing. Need this simple argument be pressed? Whence
the tune, if not from the tune-book? Is it improvised by the leading
singer? Suppose that it may be, and he would be the only singer. It
would be impossible for others to unite with him.

It may be replied that the organ also gives the tune. This is a
mistake. The organ is as much indebted to the tune-book for the tune
as is a leading singer. If the organist should improvise the tune,
where would be the singing? It will hardly be contended that a solo
on the organ would be the singing of the congregation, or that the
organ sings at all.

It may still be said that the tune-book is not necessary to singing,
since it is a fact that singing is often done without it. This is a
mistake also. The tune-book may be absent as a book, but the tune it
contains is present in the mind of the leading singer, he remembers
what he got from it. It is a necessity to him, whether literally
absent or present, he cannot sing without the tune, and the tune is
in the tune-book.

*Finally,*the mighty contest may yet be maintained on the ground
that some leading singers do not know the musical notes, and,
therefore, cannot depend on the tune-book for the tune. True, there
are some who are ignorant of the notes, but all the same they depend
on the tune-book, not immediately, but mediately and really. For the
tune is learned, in the first instance, only from some one who does
know the notes and got the tune from the book. The tune-book is the
first cause of the tune, and is necessary to its existence. Of
course, tunes are learned by the ear. Most members of a congregation
so learn them. But these persons acquire them from the leading
singer, and he received them from the tune-book. So that, look at
the matter as we may, the tune-book is necessary to the singing of
praise: it conditions its performance.

If, now, it be objected that the tune-book is a circumstance not
common to human actions and societies, and is equally, with
instrumental music, according to this argument, excluded from the
discretionary control of the church, I answer, That is true. It is
circumstances in the natural sphere, those which attend actions as
actions, and not this or that particular action of a distinctive
society, that fall within the discretion of the church. Consequently
both of these circumstances—the tune-book and instrumental
music—fall without that discretion. They both condition the
performance of an act peculiar to the church. But the difference
between them is this: One is necessary to the performance of a
commanded duty, namely, the singing of praise, and the other is not.
The singing of praise is undoubtedly a commanded duty, and it
follows that what is a necessary condition of its discharge comes
also under the scope of command. It is, therefore, not discretionary
with the church to employ it; it is obligatory. It must be employed,
or the commanded duty fails to be done. It is not so with
instrumental music. It is not a condition necessary to the commanded
duty of singing praise; neither is it a natural circumstance
conditioning the acts of all societies. It is, therefore, neither
obligatory upon nor discretionary with the church to use it. It is
consequently excluded.
Footnotes:

[1] Chap. i., Sec. vi. [[back]](#back1)

[2] In addition to this, let it be noticed that in preaching to men
worship is not directly offered to God; in singing praise it is, at
least in great part. [[back]](#back2) \


# CONCLUDING REMARKS.

The foregoing argument has proceeded principally by two steps. The
first is: Whatsoever, in connection with the public worship of the
church, is not commanded by Christ, either expressly or by good and
necessary consequence, in his Word, is forbidden. The second is:
Instrumental music, in connection with the public worship of the
church is not so commanded by Christ. The conclusion is:
Instrumental music, in connection with the public worship of the
church, is forbidden. If the premises are materially true, and if
they are logically connected in the argument, the conclusion is
irresistible. The first premise, which is denied by Romanists,
Prelatists, and Latitudinarians, has been established by proofs
derived from the Scriptures. The position that the church has power
to decree rites connected with the worship of God’s house, rites not
prescribed in the divine Word, is confessedly a doctrine of men,
making a substantive addition to the only sufficient, complete and
infallible rule of faith and practice. Of those who contend for this
principle, .the Romanist alone is consistent. It is plain that such
a discretionary power in the church could only be grounded in her
possession of continued inspiration. If she have that gift her
authority is equal to that of the inspired organizers and
instructors of the church themselves. She can supplement the
Scriptures. But the claim to inspiration can only be substantiated
by the working of miracles. This Rome admits, and meets the
requirement by appealing to *her*miracles. These professed miracles
are, however, of such a character as not to be placed above
impeachment. They may be accounted for upon natural principles. They
never rise to the point of creative power, nor of the power that
restores life to the dead. The Protestant church, therefore, rejects
the claim of Rome to inspiration and infallibility, and is
consequently bound to deny the authority of that church, or any
other, to decree rites and ceremonies not prescribed in the Word of
God. For a church theoretically to make such a claim is to confess
itself, to that extent, apostate. It is in flagrant rebellion
against the sole authority of Christ as expressed in his Word. The
past history of the church is a comment upon the correctness of this
indictment.

The second premise, namely, that instrumental music is, in
connection with the public worship of the church, not commanded by
Christ, either expressly or by good and necessary consequence in his
Word, is acknowledged to be true by all consistent Presbyterians.
One would, therefore, argue that they would exclude it from the
public worship of the church; and so, indeed, they have done until a
comparatively recent period. On that very ground they have justly
refused to employ it. How is the amazing change to its employment to
be accounted for? How is it that in Scotland such a revolution
against the historic position of the Presbyterian Church is now in
full progress? How is it that in the conservative Scotch-Irish
Church so formidable an effort is making to upset its testimony and
its practice in relation to this subject? How is it that such men as
Breckinridge and Thornwell, in the American Presbyterian Church,
were hardly cold in their graves before, in the very places where
they had thundered forth their contentions for the mighty principle
which demands a divine warrant for every element of doctrine,
government and worship, and where they had, in obedience to that
principle, utterly refused to admit instrumental music into the
church, the organ pealed forth its triumphs over their views? How is
this state of things to be explained?

There is a class who look with indifference upon the question, who
are willing that human opinions shall prevail and human tastes shall
be gratified in the arrangements of public worship. It is needless
to say that, as they disregard alike the teachings of God’s Word and
the testimonies of their forefathers, they are countenancing a
course which must, if not interrupted by the extraordinary
interposition of divine providence or divine grace, land the church
in open apostasy from the gospel.

There is a second class who maintain the prelatical theory, that
whatsoever is not expressly—that is, in explicit terms—forbidden in
the New Testament Scriptures is permitted. Those who hold this view
break with the Westminster standards, play into the hands of
Ritualists, and convert the ordinances of the Presbyterian Church,
as the maintainers of the same principle have those of the Anglican,
into propaedeutics for the *cultus*of Rome.

There is a third class who hold that, as instrumental music was
commanded of God in the Old Testament church, it is justifiable in
that of tile New Testament. It is one of the things which God
himself has prescribed. This is very extraordinary ground for
Christians to take. It is hard to believe that they would contend
for the following positions, logically validated by their view: That
every positive enactment of the divine will under the old
dispensation passes over unchanged in its authority to the new; that
the Christian church is the Jewish temple, or even modeled in
conformity with it; that the types of the Old Testament are
continued in the new; that what was not warrantable to the Jew in
the worship of the synagogue is justifiable to the Christian in that
of the church; that all the external elements of worship authorized
in the Psalms are allowable in the Christian church, for, upon that
ground, animal sacrifices would also be proper; and that the whole
nominal church, from the apostles to Thomas Aquinas, in 1250, was
mistaken in regard to this matter. Still, carrying with it these
consequences as it does, this view is supported by some in the
Presbyterian Church.

There is a fourth class—and it is believed to be the largest—who
hold theoretically to the great principle, that whatsoever is not
commanded is forbidden, but deny its applicability to instrumental
music in connection with the public worship of the church. They
contend that it is one of the circumstances which the Confession of
Faith assigns to the discretionary control of the church. This is
probably the chief explanation of the wonderful change that is
passing over the Presbyterian Church in the sphere of worship. It is
to be feared that very few of her ministers and ruling elders have
ever thoroughly studied the *Doctrine of Circumstances.*How many of
them have ever expounded it to the people over whom the Holy Ghost
has made them overseers? Nothing is more common than to hear it said
that this question is one concerning a "circumstantial detail" of
subordinate value, and that the issue, as one of minor importance,
must give way to others of more commanding interest which are
pressing upon the church. This confusion of thought would be
surprising were it not so general. What a profound mistake is
couched in such remarks! Instead of the circumstances relegated by
the Confession to the discretion of the church being circumstantial
details of worship, they are not details of worship at all. Instead
of their being of secondary importance, they are indispensable—not
as parts of worship, but as natural conditions of its performance.
Without them there would be, there could be, no joint worship. The
assemblies of the saints would be a dream.

The change which is taking place more and more in the worship of the
Presbyterian Church is due to the combined influence of the views
held by all these classes, but the chief peril results from that
maintained by the last which has been named. It is almost
inconceivable that the majority of the officers and members of the
Presbyterian Church can have abandoned the consecrated principle
that a divine warrant is needed for every element which enters into
the worship of God’s house. Were that so, open apostasy in the
department of worship would be acknowledged. But of what avail is
the professed acceptance of the principle, if its application be
refused? How it happens that this principle, which was construed by
the Presbyterian reformers and the framers of the Westminster
standards as excluding instrumental music from public worship, and
was so applied by the Presbyterian Church almost universally for
centuries after the Reformation, is now interpreted in such a way as
to admit this Popish innovation into the once simple and evangelical
services of that church, defies comprehension except upon one
supposition. It is, that the Presbyterian Church is slackening her
grasp upon her ancient testimonies, broadening her practice in
conformity with the demands of worldly taste, and is therefore more
and more treading the path of defection from the scriptural
principles which she professes. The revolution in her practice began
in the American Church scarcely beyond the recollection of some now
living, and certainly in the Scottish Churches within that of those
who are not yet fifty years of age. But once begun, what rapid
progress it made! What would Gillespie and Calderwood now say, what
Chalmers and Candlish, Cunningham and Begg, what Mason, Breckinridge
and Thornwell—what would they say, were they permitted to rise from
their graves, and revisit the scenes of their labors—the churches
for which they toiled and prayed?

It is evident that a great change has taken place. Now, either it
has been for the better or for the worse. If it be contended that it
is for the better, these great men, and thousands who thought as
they did, are pronounced to have been ignorant of the Scriptures and
the principles of the Presbyterian system. Who are they that will
assume such a censorship? Let them by argument prove their claim to
this arrogated superiority. If they cannot—and they certainly have
not yet done it—let them abandon the unwarrantable attempt to
revolutionize the long-standing and scriptural practice of their
church, and, ere it be too late, return to the good old paths
trodden by their fathers. We are not bound to wear the yoke of human
authority, it will be said. No. But these men wore the yoke of
divine authority, and we ought to do the same. This is your own
human assertion, it will be replied. Yes. But it is an assertion
proved by irrefragable argument, founded on the Scriptures, the
Presbyterian standards and the history of the true Church of Christ.
The burden of proof rests upon those who have made, or who
countenance, this change. They offer proof derived from the
principles of nature and from human taste. What argument from
Scripture is presented is such as would make us turn Jews and
worship at the temple. It would not even convert us into Jews who
worshipped at the synagogue. It is an argument which would take the
Christian church over the ruins of the synagogue back to the temple,
and in effect re-enact the madness of Julian by an attempt to
construct again that abrogated institute.

But whatever may be the want of satisfactory argument to ground this
wide-spread and astounding defection from the old, conservative
position of the Presbyterian Church, the mournful fact is patent,
that the congregations which that church embraces are more and more
succumbing to its baleful influence. The ministers who are opposed
to the unscriptural movement are, many of them at least, indisposed
to throw themselves into opposition to its onward rush. They are
unwilling to make an issue with their people upon this question.
They are reluctant to characterize the employment of instrumental
music in public worship as a sin. But a sin it is, if there be any
force in the argument which opposes it. The people ought to be
taught that in using it they rebel against the law of Christ, their
King.

It bodes ill for the church that this subject is now so often
treated in a flippant and even jocular manner. The question of the
use of instrumental music in the public worship of God’s house is,
for example, sometimes placed upon the same foot with that in regard
to the use of tobacco. Both questions are scouted as equally
illegitimate and equally trivial. Is tobacco ever mentioned in the
Word of God? Is it forgotten that a private habit of an individual
is a vastly different thing from an action which modifies the
public, solemn singing of God’s praise by a congregation of
professed worshippers? Such levity partakes of profanity. It makes a
mock of holy things. The indulgence of this temper by our church
courts will betoken the departure of our glory. It is not less than
shocking to suppose that the church can make light of a subject
about which God’s jealousy has smoked, and his anger has broken out
into a consuming flame. If she will employ instruments of music, let
her at least refrain from fiddling while many of her children are
mourning over what they feel to be the corruption of her worship and
the decay of her spirituality. Nero fiddled while Rome was burning,
and Belshazzar was desecrating the vessels of God’s sanctuary in the
midst of revelry when the mystic hand wrote on the wall of his
palace the sentence of doom.

Those of us who protest against this revolution in Presbyterian
worship are by some pitied, by others ridiculed, and by others still
denounced as fanatics. If we are, we share the company of an
innumerable host of fanatics extending from the day of Pentecost to
tile middle of the nineteenth century. We refuse not to be classed,
although consciously unworthy of the honor, with apostles, martyrs
and reformers. But neither were they mad, nor are we. We "speak the
words of truth and soberness." Mindful of the apostolic injunction,
"Prove all things," we submit arguments derived from Scripture, from
the formularies of our church and from the *consensus*of Christ’s
people, and respectfully invoke for them the attention of our
brethren. We call upon them to examine these arguments, and either
disprove or adopt them. But should they be dismissed without notice,
and our faithful remonstrances be unheeded, we humbly, but
earnestly, warn the church of the evil and bitter consequences which
will, we verily believe, be entailed by that corruption of public
worship which has been pointed out; and against it, in the name of
the framers of our venerable standards, in the name of the
reformers, divines and martyrs of the Presbyterian Church, in the
name of Christ’s true witnesses in the centuries of the past, in the
name of the inspired apostles, and. above all, in the name of our
glorious King and Head, we erect our solemn PROTEST. \






